At U.N., Biden calls for unity in addressing pandemic and climate change
The president defended the chaotic withdrawal from Afghanistan and sought to reassure allies that the United States really is back.
 
Trump sues New York Times and niece Mary Trump over tax records story
The lawsuit alleges that Mary Trump and the New York Times participated in an "insidious plot" to obtain records about the former president’s finances.
 
Trump aims to inject more extreme election conspiracy theorists into GOP
Trump's endorsements have almost uniformly focused on those elevating some of the most extreme false voter-fraud claims.
 
Why are there thousands of Haitian migrants at the Texas border?
Thousands of migrants from Haiti are camped out under a bridge in South Texas trying to enter the United States, leading to a fresh humanitarian and political crisis for President Biden.
 
Trump aims to inject more extreme election conspiracy theorists into GOP
Trump's endorsements have almost uniformly focused on those elevating some of the most extreme false voter-fraud claims.
 
Why are there thousands of Haitian migrants at the Texas border?
Thousands of migrants from Haiti are camped out under a bridge in South Texas trying to enter the United States, leading to a fresh humanitarian and political crisis for President Biden.
 
The brazen timeline of the GOP consultant accused of funneling Russian money to Trump’s 2016 effort
Jesse Benton is accused of a campaign finance scheme that took place even as he was being sentenced for a previous one.
 
Texas Gov. Abbott sends miles of cars along border to deter migrants
The Republican blamed the Biden administration for creating “chaos” in the Del Rio area and vowed to beef up border security.
 
Youngkin campaign targets McAuliffe’s parole record through dubious links
An emotional campaign ad features a victim complaining of McAuliffe's parole policies -- but her shooter has never been paroled.
 
Amid furor over border images, Biden faces Democratic backlash on immigration
As viral images circulated of mounted border agents grabbing Haitian migrants, activists reacted with unusually harsh language, suggesting they would no longer give Biden the benefit of the doubt.
 
At U.N., Biden calls for unity in addressing pandemic and climate change
The president defended the chaotic withdrawal from Afghanistan and sought to reassure allies that the United States really is back.
 
GOP Senate candidates back Trump on almost everything. But only Greitens has joined him in publicly attacking McConnell.
The former governor resigned in 2018 amid allegations that he hit, groped and coerced a woman into sexual contact. He has since tied his political fortunes to Trump.
 
The Trailer: A socialist beat the mayor of Buffalo in a primary. He's still running.
In this edition: Democrats versus socialism in Buffalo, six easy steps to steal the presidency, and liberals get organized in Hawaii.
 
It turns out that Trump’s claims of fraud were not scrupulously vetted for accuracy
Breaking: Dog Bites Man.
 
The brazen timeline of the GOP consultant accused of funneling Russian money to Trump’s 2016 effort
Jesse Benton is accused of a campaign finance scheme that took place even as he was being sentenced for a previous one.
 
What to know about the big budget battles in Congress
The next few weeks will be the most challenging ones in a decade for Democrats in Congress. For starters, they need to figure out how to keep the government open, raise the debt ceiling and pass emergency natural disaster aid.
 
Huge hack reveals embarrassing details of who’s behind Proud Boys and other far-right websites
Epik long has been the favorite Internet company of the far-right, providing domain services to QAnon theorists, Proud Boys and other instigators of the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol .
 
The hidden cost of the coronavirus death toll to younger Americans
All deaths are tragic. The death of someone in his 20s, though, is a different tragedy than the death of someone in his 90s.
 
Harris, Mayorkas say they were horrified by images of horse-mounted Border Patrol agents confronting Haitian migrants
In separate television interviews, the vice president and homeland security secretary said images recorded along the Rio Grande demand a swift but through investigation.
 
Tracking the political appointees Biden is nominating to fill the top roles in his administration
Follow the president-elect’s progress filling nearly 800 positions, among the 1,200 that require Senate confirmation, in this tracker from The Washington Post and the Partnership for Public Service.
 
Tucker Carlson outdoes himself on vaccines, again
Carlson unveils yet another corrosive conspiracy theory about vaccines and the military.
 
By memo or by mob, Trump and his team positioned the country for chaos
We're getting a better sense of how Trump's allies tried to twist the law to steal the presidency.
 
Ben & Jerry’s new ice cream flavor supports Rep. Cori Bush’s ‘People’s Response Act’ policing bill
The company was among the most vocal in corporate America after the death of George Floyd.
 
What to know about the Texas abortion law
The Supreme Court declined to step in to stop a Texas law that bans abortions after six weeks of pregnancy. Here’s what that means for legalized abortion in America.
 
