AzureTableStor: R interface to Azure table storage service
by Hong Ooi I’m pleased to announce that the AzureTableStor package, providing a simple yet powerful interface to the Azure table storage service, is now on CRAN. This is something that many people have requested since the initial release of the AzureR packages nearly two years ago. Azure table storage is a service that stores structured NoSQL data in the cloud, providing a key/attribute store with a schemaless design. Because table storage is schemaless, it’s easy to adapt your data as the needs of your application evolve. Access to table storage data is fast and cost-effective for many types of...
 
R 4.0.3 now available
The R Core Team has released R 4.0.3 (codename: "Bunny-Wunnies Freak Out"), the latest update to the R statistical computing system. This is a minor update to the R 4.0.x series, and so should not require any changes to existing R 4.0 scripts or packages. It is available for download for Windows, Mac and Linux systems from your local CRAN mirror. This release includes minor improvements and bug fixes including improved timezone support on MacOS, improved labels on dot charts, better handling of large tables for Fisher's Exact Test and Chi-Square tests, and control over timeouts for internet connections. For...
 
Microsoft R Open 4.0.2 now available
Microsoft R Open 4.0.2 has been released, combining the latest R language engine with multi-processor performance and tools for managing R packages reproducibly. You can download Microsoft R Open 4.0.2 for Windows,and Linux from MRAN now. Microsoft R Open is 100% compatible with all R version 4 scripts and packages, and works with all your favorite R interfaces and development environments. This update brings R version 4 to Microsoft R Open for the first time. This update includes many new features for the R language and system, along with improved performance and memory usage. Note that you will need to...
 
MLOPS with R and GitHub Actions
With thanks to the kind folks at Lander Analytics, video from my New York R Conference talk earlier this month is now available to view. The slides are also available for download in PDF format. In my talk, I described how I automated the deployment of a Shiny app using GitHub Actions. If you're new to GitHub Actions, it's pretty simple to set up a continuous deployment process: Define jobs as YAML files in the .github/workflows folder of your GitHub repository Search the GitHub Actions Marketplace for templates of tasks you'd like to perform Push changes to your workflow to...
 
The History of R (updated for 2020)
As an update to this post, here's a list of the major events in R history since its creation: 1992: R development begins as a research project in Auckland, NZ by Robert Gentleman and Ross Ihaka 1993: First binary versions of R published at Statlib 1995: R first distributed as open-source software, under GPL2 license 1997: R core group formed 1997: CRAN founded (by Kurt Hornik and Fritz Leisch) 1999: The R website, r-project.org, founded 1999: First in-person meeting of R Core team, at inaugural Directions in Statistical Computing conference, Vienna 2000: R 1.0.0 released (February 29) 2000: John Chambers,...
 
R 4.0.2 now available
R 4.0.2 is now available for download for Windows, Mac and Linux platforms. This update addresses a few minor bugs included in the R 4.0.0 release, and also a significant bug introduced in R 4.0.1 on the Windows platform. Compared to R 4.0.0, the R 4.0.2 update also improves the performance of the merge function, and adds an option to better handle zero-length arguments to the paste and paste0 functions. For the details on the changes in R 4.0.2 follow the link below, and visit your local CRAN mirror to download the update. R-announce mailing list: R 4.0.2 is released
 
Custom Package Repositories in R
by Steve Belcher, Sr Technical Specialist, Microsoft Data & AI In some companies, R users can’t download R packages from CRAN. That might be because they work in an environment that’s isolated from the internet, or because company policy dictates that only specific R packages and/or package versions may be used. In this article, we share some ways you can set up a private R package repository you can use as a source of R packages. The best way to maintain R packages for the corporation when access to the internet is limited and/or package zip files are not allowed...
 
Create and deploy a Custom Vision predictive service in R with AzureVision
The AzureVision package is an R frontend to Azure Computer Vision and Azure Custom Vision. These services let you leverage Microsoft’s Azure cloud to carry out visual recognition tasks using advanced image processing models, with minimal machine learning expertise. The basic idea behind Custom Vision is to take a pre-built image recognition model supplied by Azure, and customise it for your needs by supplying a set of images with which to update it. All model training and prediction is done in the cloud, so you don’t need a powerful machine of your own. Similarly, since you are starting with a...
 
AzureQstor: R interface to Azure Queue Storage now on GitHub
This post is to announce that the AzureQstor package is now on GitHub. AzureQstor provides an R interface to Azure queue storage, building on the facilities provided by AzureStor. Queue Storage is a service for storing large numbers of messages, for example from automated sensors, that can be accessed remotely via authenticated calls using HTTP or HTTPS. A single queue message can be up to 64 KB in size, and a queue can contain millions of messages, up to the total capacity limit of a storage account. Queue storage is often used to create a backlog of work to process...
 
R 4.0.0 now available, and a look back at R's history
R 4.0.0 was released in source form on Friday, and binaries for Windows, Mac and Linux are available for download now. As the version number bump suggests, this is a major update to R that makes some significant changes. Some of these changes — particularly the first one listed below — are likely to affect the results of R's calculations, so I would not recommend running scripts written for prior versions of R without validating them first. In any case, you'll need to reinstall any packages you were using for R 4.0.0. (You might find this R script useful for...
 
