AzureTableStor: R interface to Azure table storage service
by Hong Ooi I’m pleased to announce that the AzureTableStor package, providing a simple yet powerful interface to the Azure table storage service, is now on CRAN. This is something that many people have requested since the initial release of the AzureR packages nearly two years ago. Azure table storage is a service that stores structured NoSQL data in the cloud, providing a key/attribute store with a schemaless design. Because table storage is schemaless, it’s easy to adapt your data as the needs of your application evolve. Access to table storage data is fast and cost-effective for many types of...
 
R 4.0.3 now available
The R Core Team has released R 4.0.3 (codename: "Bunny-Wunnies Freak Out"), the latest update to the R statistical computing system. This is a minor update to the R 4.0.x series, and so should not require any changes to existing R 4.0 scripts or packages. It is available for download for Windows, Mac and Linux systems from your local CRAN mirror. This release includes minor improvements and bug fixes including improved timezone support on MacOS, improved labels on dot charts, better handling of large tables for Fisher's Exact Test and Chi-Square tests, and control over timeouts for internet connections. For...
 
Microsoft R Open 4.0.2 now available
Microsoft R Open 4.0.2 has been released, combining the latest R language engine with multi-processor performance and tools for managing R packages reproducibly. You can download Microsoft R Open 4.0.2 for Windows,and Linux from MRAN now. Microsoft R Open is 100% compatible with all R version 4 scripts and packages, and works with all your favorite R interfaces and development environments. This update brings R version 4 to Microsoft R Open for the first time. This update includes many new features for the R language and system, along with improved performance and memory usage. Note that you will need to...
 
MLOPS with R and GitHub Actions
With thanks to the kind folks at Lander Analytics, video from my New York R Conference talk earlier this month is now available to view. The slides are also available for download in PDF format. In my talk, I described how I automated the deployment of a Shiny app using GitHub Actions. If you're new to GitHub Actions, it's pretty simple to set up a continuous deployment process: Define jobs as YAML files in the .github/workflows folder of your GitHub repository Search the GitHub Actions Marketplace for templates of tasks you'd like to perform Push changes to your workflow to...
 
