US economy continues to strengthen despite Delta, says FedBy Daniel ThomasBusiness reporter, New York The US economy continues to strengthen, albeit at a slower rate because of the Delta variant of Covid, the US Federal Reserve has said. The central bank said the jobs market was improving and that currently high rates of inflation remained transitory. It said it may start reducing its emergency support for the economy "soon", but did not say when.Half of its policymakers also projected interest rates will need to rise in 2022 from current rock-bottom levels.The US economy has rebounded strongly this year from its pandemic lows, but there are fears Delta will derail the recovery. The country added fewer jobs than expected in August as rising infections hit spending on travel, tourism and hospitality. Inflation, which measures the increase in the cost of living over time, is running at 5.3%  - the highest in nearly 13 years. It comes amid surging consumer demand, rising energy prices, and supply chain-related shortages. Despite this, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), which sets US monetary policy, said overall indicators of economic activity "have continued to strengthen"."The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have improved in recent months, but the rise in Covid-19 cases has slowed their recovery," it said. "Inflation is elevated, largely reflecting transitory factors. Overall financial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to US households and businesses."The FOMC said the path of the economy still depended "on the course of the virus". And it expects to keep monetary policy loose until more progress is made on stabilising unemployment - which stands at 5.2% - and consumer prices.However, it said if progress continues "broadly as expected", it may soon pare back its $120bn-a-month bond-buying programme which has helped keep borrowing rates low.Analysts said the bank was taking a cautious approach, noting no formal date was set for pulling back support. "While the Federal Reserve has laid the groundwork for an eventual taper [of asset purchases] later this year, the Fed erred on the side of caution given that the macroeconomic landscape has deteriorated somewhat over the last few months," said Candice Bangsund, a portfolio manager at Fiera Capital."Preconditions for a formal taper announcement will largely depend on economic conditions over the coming months, with an emphasis on data dependence." Gurpreet Gill, a macro strategist at Goldman Sachs, said ongoing supply chain disruption, the spread of Delta and higher inflation still weighed on the minds of Fed committee members."Given uncertainty around the health of labour market and inflationary pressures, we would not be surprised if the 'dot plot' changes again in the coming months as the pace of the recovery and underlying inflation dynamics become clearer."The Fed has two goals. It aims to keep US inflation at about 2% and to achieve maximum employment, whereby everyone who needs a job has one. During the pandemic it has supported the economy by slashing interest rates to historic lows and pumping billions of dollars into the financial system by buying government and corporate bonds.Poor US jobs growth shows Delta impactFrance and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pactThe deal caused outrage in France, which lost a contract to build submarines for Australia.Covid could be more like cold by spring - expertWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?How Germans will look back on Angela MerkelImages of Haitians at US border echo grim pastWhy China looks to be on the way back to socialismWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?No-go zones and Russian meddling in Central Africa warThe edible insects coming to a supermarket near youFact-checking President Bolsonaro's UN speechBBC Culture: Striking photos of a lesser-seen IranHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?'Side-eying Chloe', 10, to sell viral meme1France and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pact2Lithuania urges people to throw away Chinese phones3Three die in dry-ice incident at Moscow pool party4What do we know about Gabby Petito's boyfriend?5PM: Humanity reaching a turning point on climate6Angry scenes at Haiti airport as migrants arrive7Evergrande shares jump as debt deadline looms8Why China looks to be on the way back to socialism9Sabina Nessa killed on short walk to meet friend10© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.