Energy firms' collapse hits 1.5 million customers
The government is understood to have cooled on supporting big energy firms with state-backed loans.
 
Covid debt: A baby, job loss - and now eviction
Tenants are being evicted due to rent arrears built up during the pandemic, an investigation finds.
 
Police investigating if stranger killed Sabina Nessa
The teacher had been on her way to meet a friend but was killed shortly after leaving home.
 
Woman with Down's loses abortion law fight
Heidi Crowter says the current law on abortion for foetuses with the condition does not respect her life.
 
Boris Johnson: Humanity is reaching a turning point on climate change
World leaders must make major changes in four areas - "coal, cars, cash and trees", Boris Johnson says.
 
Working from home: Staff abuse it, says City boss
Staff should not have the right to ask for flexible working from day one of new job, an employer says.
 
'Side-eying Chloe' Clem to sell iconic meme as NFT
The image of Chloe Clem could fetch her tens of thousands of dollars at auction.
 
Alex Salmond inquiry leaks being investigated by police
The leaks relate to the Scottish government's inquiry into harassment allegations against the former first minister.
 
Extremists using video-game chats to spread hate
Campaigners say including extremist narratives among everyday conversations can be a pathway to radicalisation.
 
Angry scenes at Haiti airport as deported migrants arrive
The US is flying migrants out of a Texas border town where 13,000 have gathered in makeshift camps.
 
Petting zoo wallaby escapes into Aberdeenshire countryside
Eddie, who is about six months old, escaped the day after arriving and was last seen outside a village pub.
 
Victorian ticket ledger found at March railway station
The luggage ledger dates back to April 1885, when the railway station opened.
 
What can I do if my energy supplier goes bust?
Nearly 1.5 million customers have seen their energy firm collapse as a result of soaring gas prices.
 
The Papers: 'Winter of woe' and France rift deepens
The ongoing gas crisis and France's anger over a new UK-US-Australia military pact make the front pages.
 
Grim echoes of history in images of Haitians at US-Mexico border
Pictures of border officers rounding up black men have drawn comparisons to US slave patrols.
 
Covid-19: New allergic reactions to hair dye reported
Scientists at Imperial College London are now researching a link between Covid-19 and new allergies.
 
Angela Merkel: What will Germans miss about the chancellor?
BBC Europe editor Katya Adler takes a road trip to find out how Germans will remember their chancellor.
 
Saoirse Ronan: Macbeth and Lady Macbeth are like Kim and Kanye
The actress says Kim Kardashian has inspired the "uncharted territory" of her first UK stage role.
 
La Palma volcano lava engulfs homes and swimming pools
Molten rock from the erupting Cumbre Vieja volcano is destroying hundreds of buildings.
 
Is 'the worst cold ever' going around?
As more people mix again, the common cold is back - and leaving people floored.
 
Boris Johnson at the UN fact-checked
The prime minister's speech focused largely on climate change and the UK's role in tackling it.
 
Angela Merkel: Four expert verdicts on a contested legacy
When the German chancellor steps down, how will history remember her? Four experts have their say.
 
'Giving birth left me needing a colostomy bag'
Former triathlete Kayleigh Adams endured a fourth-degree tear that led to her needing a colostomy bag.
 
The edible insects coming to a supermarket near you
A number of firms are now farming locusts and mealworms for human consumption.
 
Changing China: Why Xi Jinping is leading a way back to socialism
China has not been very socialist for years, but the Communist Party looks set to change that.
 
Claims on pay, tax and the cost of living checked
Deputy prime minister Dominic Raab took Prime Minister's Questions on Wednesday.
 
Johnson and Biden: Contrasting characters do business
No major gaffes and progress on climate change on PM's US trip but a trade deal remains a distant prospect.
 
Australian PM Morrison says 'no special deals' for families of England's Ashes players
Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison says there will be "no special deals" after Boris Johnson asks for families of England cricketers to be allowed to travel for the Ashes.
 
Gatland's Lions selections not based on form, says Ireland lock Henderson
Warren Gatland did not base his British and Irish Lions Test team selections on form in South Africa, says Iain Henderson.
 
'It's been a long time waiting' - everything you need to know about 43rd Ryder Cup
Three years after Europe regained the Ryder Cup in Paris, the US finally have their opportunity to avenge that thrashing in front of a partisan home crowd in Wisconsin.
 
West Ham knock out Man Utd to reach EFL Cup fourth round
West Ham gain revenge for Sunday's Premier League defeat by Manchester United by knocking their hosts out of the Carabao Cup at Old Trafford.
 
Afghanistan's female volleyball players tell of threats and fear
Afghan female volleyball players tell the BBC that one of the squad was killed last month.
 
Covid: How can missing five million be persuaded to have the jab?
Headlines have focused on teenagers and booster doses - but millions still haven't had a first jab.
 
Travel update: What are the new rules for holidays in Europe and the US?
Eight countries have now moved from the UK's red travel lists, to the less restrictive amber.
 
Covid: Should I be working from home or going back to the office?
People in England could be told to work from home once again through the autumn and winter.
 
Covid symptoms: What are they and how do I protect myself?
A new cough, fever and change in smell or taste are the key symptoms that mean you may have coronavirus.
 
Covid-19 in the UK: How many coronavirus cases are there in my area?
Explore the data on coronavirus in the UK and find out how many cases there are in your area.
 
Back to school: How are pupils being kept Covid-safe?
Most 12 to 15-year-olds will be vaccinated at school, to help limit disruption to their education.
 
Is it safe to vaccinate our child? And other questions
We answer some of your questions about vaccinating 12-15 year-olds, the booster vaccine and other topics.
 
Covid passports: How do I get one and when will I need it?
People in Scotland will need to be fully vaccinated to go to clubs, sporting events and concerts.
 
Covid rules: What's in England's 'Winter Plan'?
Lockdown rules have changed across the UK, but some restrictions remain in place.
 
Coronavirus: Where does the government borrow billions from?
How does it work when a government wants to borrow money, and when does it have to pay it back?
 
Universal credit: When will the £20 increase stop?
The government has confirmed the £20 boost will end in the autumn.
 
What are the travel rules for Spain, Portugal, Malta and other holiday hotspots?
What you need to know about going to Portugal, Spain, Greece, France, Malta, Italy and Turkey.
 
Covid: People are vaccinated - so why are there so many cases?
More than four out of five UK adults are now fully vaccinated, but daily case rates remain high.
 
Long Covid: What is it and what are the symptoms?
Significant numbers have had long-term problems after recovering from the original infection.
 
The torso in the Thames: A 20-year mystery
Twenty years ago, a young African boy was murdered and his torso was dumped in the Thames. It's the longest unsolved child murder case in the recent history of the Metropolitan Police.
 
Paul Rusesabagina: From Hotel Rwanda hero to convicted terrorist
Paul Rusesabagina, who was portrayed in Hotel Rwanda, has gone from national hero to enemy of the state.
 
Fake Paralympians boss: 'I didn't know about cheating'
The man fined for sending non-disabled athletes to the Sydney Paralympics breaks his silence.
 
Muriel Gardiner: The heiress who saved countless lives
Muriel Gardiner's courage fighting fascism in Austria inspired an Oscar-winning film. Who was she?
 
Hushpuppi - the Instagram influencer and international fraudster
How Nigerian Ramon Abbas went from a romance scammer to a so-called "Billionaire Gucci Master".
 
