Pope jokes he is ‘still alive’ despite some bishops wishing him dead
The pope's post-surgery joke marked a frank acknowledgment of the forces within the church who are at odds with him.
 
China Evergrande veers toward default — and a $300 billion global shock
Despite a pledge to pay some debts due this week, the massive property developer is teetering on the brink of collapse.
 
Germany’s Merkel makes final campaign push for stumbling political heir
Armin Laschet has campaigned poorly, threatening Merkel’s legacy.
 
Kim Jong Un shift from nuclear push to economy intensified internal debates in country, report says
The analysis by 38 North offered rare look into splits within Kim’s regime.
 
Brazil’s health minister tests positive for coronavirus at U.N. General Assembly
Marcelo Queiroga was accompanying a defiantly unvaccinated President Jair Bolsonaro.
 
A Japanese man threatened a ‘bloodbath’ at a vaccination site. He sent his warning via fax.
Frustrated at losing his job in the pandemic, the man allegedly wrote his missive and sent it with a cover letter titled “Death Threat.”
 
U.S. preparing to nearly double deportations to Haiti as some returnees decry being shackled
The United States is preparing to nearly double the number of Haitians being deported from Texas starting Wednesday, raising alarm that thousands of cash-strapped migrants will add a new dimension to the humanitarian crisis in a country torn apart by violence, natural disaster and political strife.
 
'Yes, that was an earthquake’: Australia rocked by rare, powerful temblor
A powerful earthquake struck Australia's southeast, damaging buildings in Melbourne.
 
What to know about ‘Havana Syndrome’, the mysterious illness affecting U.S. officials around the world
Symptoms linked to Havana Syndrome have now affected rouhgly 200 U.S personnel in multiple countries.
 
U.K’s Boris Johnson comes to America to push for climate commitments — and make nice with Biden
Johnson will be using a visit to the U.N. General Assembly to prepare the ground for the climate summit he is hosting in November.
 
Boris Johnson confirms he has six children. This is a big story in Britain.
The prime minister has dodged the question for years.
 
Family of Harry Dunn, killed British teen, reaches settlement with American driver Anne Sacoolas
The accident that killed Dunn became a diplomatic dispute. A criminal case is still pending.
 
Gas station clerk in Germany killed by man who felt ‘cornered’ by mask rules, prosecutors say
There are growing fears in Germany about an increasingly radicalizing base of coronavirus deniers and anti-mandate activists.
 
Sudanese authorities say military coup by remnants of past regime thwarted
People involved in the coup were arrested, according to a statement from the prime minister's office.
 
Justin Trudeau will lead a minority government — again. What to know about the Canadian election results.
The makeup of Parliament was a near-mirror image of the one that existed when Trudeau called the early vote.
 
British police identify new suspect in Russian Novichok double-agent poisoning
The announcement comes as the European court of human rights implicated Russia in another political assassination.
 
Beer, chicken and now carbon dioxide: Why Britain’s shortages keep coming
The chaos was triggered by the coronavirus pandemic and Brexit.
 
Brazil’s unvaccinated Bolsonaro appears to break U.N. vaccine ‘honor system’ during address
The United Nations claimed there was an "honor system" to ensure vaccination among world leaders. Bolsonaro spoke anyway.
 
U.K. Defense Ministry investigating email exposing Afghan interpreters seeking rescue
Many are still in hiding in Afghanistan and hoping to get to Britain.
 
China is key to saving the planet from climate change. But it can’t quit coal.
Beijing’s approach could determine the outcome of a critical U.N. climate summit.
 
Shots fired at Ukraine presidential aide's car
Ukrainian police say the car of a top aide to the country’s president came under heavy gunfire, seriously wounding the driver
 
Dutch activists lose ethnic profiling case, vow to appeal
A Dutch court has ruled that border police can use ethnicity as one of the criteria for selecting people for checks at the border
 
German president asks country to confront its colonial past
Germany’s president has called on the country to face its cruel colonial past as he opened a new museum in the capital’s center that will be home to two of Berlin’s state museums which include looted artifacts from countries in Africa and elsewhere
 
Croatian police identify woman found with memory loss
Croatian police say they have established the identity of a woman who was found in a remote area on a northern Adriatic island with no recollection of who she was or where she came from
 
‘My whole life in a van’: islanders flee Spanish volcano
A wall of lava up to 12 meters (40 feet) high is bearing down on a Spanish island village following a volcanic eruption
 
