HS2 rail extension to Leeds set to be scrapped
Plans to extend the eastern leg of the high speed network will be ditched in favour of new shorter links.
 
Shell plans to move headquarters to the UK
The oil giant will shift its tax residence from the Netherlands to the UK and its boss will relocate.
 
Real Living Wage rises to £9.90 an hour
More than 300,000 people at firms accredited with the Living Wage Foundation will get the increase.
 
No turkey shortage, says British Poultry Council
There will be turkeys for Christmas, the industry says, but producers warn there will be less variety.
 
Trump Organization selling Washington hotel for $375m, reports say
The historic building will reportedly be renamed the Waldorf Astoria and managed by the Hilton group.
 
Charities facing a 'perfect storm' as demand rises
Research given to the BBC reveals hundreds of charities face rising demand for services this winter.
 
China property: New home prices see biggest fall since 2015
China's property sector has been rocked over fears about the future of real estate giant Evergrande.
 
Delta boss says climate change means flying will cost more
The world's second largest airline says climate change is the biggest challenge facing aviation.
 
'I can't get equity release on my eco-friendly home'
Andrew Bennett built an energy efficient home, but cannot borrow money against its value.
 
No regrets! Pandemic purchases that made us happy
Not everyone has buyer's remorse over what they bought in lockdown. For some, it changed their lives.
 
Shein suppliers' workers doing 75-hour week, finds probe
A new report suggests some of the fast fashion brand's suppliers may be violating labour laws in China.
 
Portugal bans bosses texting staff after-hours
The move is part of sweeping labour laws to regulate the country's expansion of home-working.
 
Pandemic-hit airline industry to regroup at Dubai Airshow
The aerospace event will be the first of its kind since before Covid-19 hurt international travel.
 
AstraZeneca to take profits from Covid vaccine
The drugs giant signs new deals, but poorer countries will continue to get the vaccine at cost price.
 
Strategies to close the pandemic gender gap at work
Covid has pushed many women out of the workforce what practical ideas will entice them back?
 
Women warned home working may harm their careers
Bank of England economist Catherine Mann says mothers could be particularly vulnerable.
 
Xbox 20th anniversary: 'Will we have TVs in 20 years time?'
Xbox boss Phil Spencer talks to BBC podcast Press X to Continue on the console's 20th anniversary.
 
Would the world be better if it was run by teenagers?
One energy firm has appointed an advisory board of six young people to help guide the business.
 
CEO Secrets: 'Wearing caps on video calls keeps us unified'
A CEO reveals a simple trick she used to keep her team feeling unified through Covid.
 
Rwanda goes electric with locally made motorbikes
Rwanda's Ampersand wants motorbike taxi drivers to switch from petrol to electric.
 
Matt Moulding: The billionaire THG boss facing a reality check
Matt Moulding floated THG in a blaze of glory, but a year later the shine has dimmed for the entrepreneur.
 
One smart idea to reduce wood waste in construction
A new system is being launched to allow builders to reuse wooden pallets multiple times.
 
How will the US deal with a shortage of 80,000 truckers?
The chronic lack of lorry drivers in the US is adding to supply chain woes - and could get worse.
 
