Four short links: 24 Nov 2020
OpenStreetMap is Having a Moment — Apple was responsible for more edits in 2019 than Mapbox accounted for in its entire corporate history. See also the 2020: Curious Cases of Corporations in OpenStreetMap talk from State of the Map. (via Simon Willison) Drone Warfare — The second point, “SkyNet”, is the interesting bit. Azerbaijan and […]
 
Four short links: 20 Nov 2020
epr — Terminal/CLI Epub reader. I Should Have Loved Biology — Conveys well the magic of the field. Notable also for the reference to A Computer Scientist’s Guide to Cell Biology, which I didn’t realise existed. Ur-Technical Debt — Reviving Ward Cunningham’s take on technical debt. Simply put, ur-technical debt arises when my ideas diverge […]
 
On Exactitude in Technical Debt
If software is such stuff as dreams are made on, how do we talk about nightmares? Software is not the tangible, kickable stuff our senses are tuned to, so we draw on metaphor to communicate and reason about it. The 1970s offered up spaghetti code to describe the tangle of unstructured control flow. This has […]
 
Four short links: 17 Nov 2020
NDSS Symposium 2020 Papers — Large pile of security research from the 2020 Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, including papers on topics as wide-reaching as hypervisor fuzzing and The Attack of the Clones Against Proof-of-Authority which sounds like a very niche Star Wars sequel indeed. Liquid Information Flow Control — We present Lifty, a […]
 
Four short links: 13 Nov 2020
Advanced System on a Chip Lecture Notes (2016) — Topics: 1. Basic Processor & Memory hierarchy; 2. Advanced Out-of-Order Processor; 3. Data-parallel processors; 4. Micro-controller introduction; 5. Multicore; 6. RISC-V core; 7. Advanced Multicore; 8. Multicore programming; 9. Graphics Processing Unit (GPU); 10. Heterogeneous SoC; 11. GPU Programming; 12. Application-Specific Instruction-Set Processor (ASIP); 13 PULP: […]
 
Multi-Paradigm Languages
The programming world used to be split into functional languages, object-oriented languages, and everything else (mostly procedural languages). One “was” a functional programmer (at least as a hobby) writing Lisp, Haskell, or Erlang; or one “was” an OO programmer (at least professionally), writing code in Java or C++.  (One never called oneself a “procedural programmer”; […]
 
Four short links: 10 November 2020
Hypothesis as Liability — Would the mental focus on a specific hypothesis prevent us from making a discovery? To test this, we made up a dataset and asked students to analyze it. […] The most notable “discovery” in the dataset was that if you simply plotted the number of steps versus the BMI, you would […]
 
Four short links: 6 Nov 2020
Dealing with Security Holes in Chips — system security starts at the hardware layer. Ubooquity — free home server for your comics and ebooks library. “Like plex for books.” Noisepage — a relational database management system developed by the Carnegie Mellon Database Group. The research goal of the NoisePage project is to develop high-performance system […]
 
Four short links: 4 Nov 2020
The AI Who Mistook a Bald Head for a Football — Second-tier Scottish football club Inverness Caledonian Thistle doesn’t have a camera operator for matches at their stadium so the club uses an AI-controlled camera that’s programmed to follow the ball for their broadcasts. But in a recent match against Ayr United, the AI controller […]
 
Radar trends to watch: November 2020
Perhaps the most important event this month isn’t technical, but the start of the US Justice Dept.’s lawsuit against Google. That will certainly play out over years rather than months, but it’s significance is less about this particular case than the idea that legal and regulatory systems will play a large role in the evolution […]
 
Four short links: 30 Oct 2020
Mutation Testing — in this paper, we semi-automatically learn error-inducing patterns from a corpus of common Java coding errors and from changes that caused operational anomalies at Facebook specifically. We combine the mutations with instrumentation that measures which tests exactly visited the mutated piece of code. Results on more than 15,000 generated mutants show that […]
 
Four short links: 28 Oct 2020
Phantom of the ADAS — In this paper, we investigate “split-second phantom attacks,” a scientific gap that causes two commercial advanced driver-assistance systems (ADASs), Telsa Model X (HW 2.5 and HW 3) and Mobileye 630, to treat a depthless object that appears for a few milliseconds as a real obstacle/object. Turns out neural networks can […]
 
Our Favorite Questions
“On peut interroger n’importe qui, dans n’importe quel état; ce sont rarement les réponses qui apportent la vérité, mais l’enchaînement des questions.“ “You can interrogate anyone, no matter what their state of being.  It’s rarely their answers that unveil the truth, but the sequence of questions that you have to ask.“–  Inspector Pastor in La […]
 
Four short links: 21 Oct 2020
Justice Department Antitrust Filing Against Google — Claims advertising was an artificially limited market because of their exclusivity deals, including the Android anti-forking arrangements and Browser paid-default-search deals. New York Times has a write-up. This may be more important, historically, than the election results. Differential Dataflow — Differential dataflow programs look like many standard “big […]
 
Four Short Links: 16 October 2020
Automerge — (Github) Data structure library for Javascript (and Rust) providing Conflict-Free Replicated Data Types (CRDTs). Automerge is designed for creating local-first software, i.e. software that treats a user’s local copy of their data (on their own device) as primary, rather than centralising data in a cloud service. Alan Turing — (BBC) An excellent episode […]
 
Four short links: 14 Oct 2020
Data Organization in Spreadsheets — Focusing on the data entry and storage aspects, this article offers practical recommendations for organizing spreadsheet data to reduce errors and ease later analyses. The basic principles are: be consistent, write dates like YYYY-MM-DD, do not leave any cells empty, put just one thing in a cell, organize the data […]
 
AI Product Management After Deployment
The field of AI product management continues to gain momentum. As the AI product management role advances in maturity, more and more information and advice has become available. Our previous articles in this series introduce our own take on AI product management, discuss the skills that AI product managers need, and detail how to bring […]
 
Four short links: 9 October 2020
T-SQL in SQLite — CG/SQL is a code generation system for the popular SQLite library that allows developers to write stored procedures in a variant of Transact-SQL (T-SQL) and compile them into C code that uses SQLite’s C API to do the coded operations. CG/SQL enables engineers to create highly complex stored procedures with very […]
 
AI and Creativity
The release of GPT-3 has reinvigorated a discussion of creativity and artificial intelligence. That’s a good discussion to have, primarily because it forces us to think carefully about what we mean when we use words like “creativity” and “art.” As I’ve argued in the past, each time we have this discussion, we end up raising […]
 
Four short links: 6 October 2020
Algorithms Can Collude — To analyze the possible consequences, we study experimentally the behavior of algorithms powered by Artificial Intelligence (Q-learning) in a workhorse oligopoly model of repeated price competition. We find that the algorithms consistently learn to charge supracompetitive prices, without communicating with one another. The high prices are sustained by collusive strategies with […]
 
Four short links: 2 October 2020
Single Device Behaves Like a Neuron — On its own, using a simple DC voltage as the input, the device outputs not just simple spikes, as some other devices can manage, but the whole array of neural activity—bursts of spikes, self-sustained oscillations, and other stuff that goes on in your brain. (Paper) USB-C Is a […]
 
Radar trends to watch: October 2020
This month, the big surprise is that there’s no significant technology news about COVID. And there is more news than ever about legislation and regulation. I suspect that the legal system will be a big driver for technology over the next year. Another trend that doesn’t quite count as technology news but that definitely bears […]
 
Four short links: 29 Sep 2020
When Coffeemakers Demand Ransom — So he then examined the mechanism the coffee maker used to receive firmware updates. It turned out they were received from the phone with—you guessed it—no encryption, no authentication, and no code signing. Nothing remarkable here other than it’s 2020 and companies still put crappy software into their hardware. Returns […]
 
Four short links: 25 September 2020
Adapton — A program P is incremental if repeating P with a changed input is faster than from-scratch computation. Adapton offers programming language abstractions for incremental computation. Migration Lessons Learned — Keep your migration scripts away from your production code; Keep it low-tech, don’t deserialize; Write tests to exercise each migration script individually; Consider running […]
 
Four short links: 18 Sep 2020
CS349 – Contemporary Issues in Computer Science — This class examines ethical frameworks, modern ethical concerns related to computer science and technology, and clear oral and written communication. Topics we will explore include policy vacuums created by new technology, copyright and patent, software bugs and liability, freedom of speech, privacy, security, employment and job markets, […]
 
Four short links: 16 Sep 2020
A Concurrency Cost Hierarchy — a higher level taxonomy that I use to think about concurrent performance. We’ll group the performance of concurrent operations into six broad levels running from fast to slow, with each level differing from its neighbors by roughly an order of magnitude in performance. They are: Contended Atomics, System Calls, Implied […]
 
How to Set AI Goals
AI Benefits and Stakeholders AI is a field where value, in the form of outcomes and their resulting benefits, is created by machines exhibiting the ability to learn and “understand,” and to use the knowledge learned to carry out tasks or achieve goals. AI-generated benefits can be realized by defining and achieving appropriate goals. These […]
 
Four short links: 11 Sep 2020
Accurately Lipsync Video to Any Speech — In our paper, A Lip Sync Expert Is All You Need for Speech to Lip Generation In the Wild, ACM Multimedia 2020, we aim to lip-sync unconstrained videos in the wild to any desired target speech. (Paper) Impressive. Temporal — Open source “workflow-as-code” engine. I can’t decide if […]
 
Four short links: 9 Sep 2020
Things I Learned to Become a Senior Software Engineer — Full of relatable growth moments, such as changing your code to make the test pass vs understanding why the test failed. The Future is Software Engineers Who Can’t Code — “There are lot of definitions of what a developer is […] It’s not just people […]
 
Pair Programming with AI
In a conversation with Kevlin Henney, we started talking about the kinds of user interfaces that might work for AI-assisted programming. This is a significant problem: neither of us were aware of any significant work on user interfaces that support collaboration. However, as software developers, many of us have been practicing effective collaboration for years. […]
 
Four short links: 4 September 2020
Inside the Digital Pregnancy Test — … is a paper pregnancy test and watch-battery-powered microcontroller connected to three LEDs, a photo-cell, and an LCD display. That (8-bit) microcontroller runs at 4MHz, almost as fast as an IBM PC did. The Incredible Proof Machine — Fun game (modelled on The Incredible Machine from the 90s) that […]
 
Four short links: 2 September 2020
VSCode Debug Visualizer — A VS Code extension for visualizing data structures while debugging. Like the VS Code’s watch view, but with rich visualizations of the watched value. The screencast is wow. Userland — an integrated dataflow environment for end-users. It allows users to interact with modules that implement functionality for different domains from a […]
 
Radar trends to watch: September 2020
Compared to the last few months, there are relatively few items about COVID. And almost no items about Blockchains, though the one item I’ve listed, about China’s Blockchain Services Network, may be the most important item here. I’m seeing a steady stream of articles about various forms of no-code/low-code programming. While many programmers scoff at […]
 
Four short links: 28 August 2020
Activity Watch — Open source, privacy-first, cross-platform app that automatically tracks how you spend time on your devices. Natural Language Database Queries — An interesting comment thread on Hacker News. Sample comments: I’ve done some previous digging into natural language SQL queries — there’s a good amount of research around this. But the error rate […]
 
An Agent of Change
The Covid-19 pandemic has changed how people and businesses spend and operate.  Over the coming pages we’ll explore ways in which our current world is already very different from the one we knew just a few months ago, as well as predictions of our “new normal” once the proverbial boat stops rocking.  Specifically, we’ll see […]
 
Four short links: 25 August 2020
Wooden Turing Machine — (YouTube) Description of how it works. It implements three data elements and two states, sufficient for any calculation (discussed here)> Not an infinite tape, because … wood. Emotional Resiliency in Leadership Report 2020 — Very interesting report, based on survey and science of burnout. It is primarily written for the survey […]
 
Four short links: 21 August 2020
The 212 Story Tower That Isn’t in Suburban Melbourne — A typo in a Open Street Map submission becomes a surprising monolith in Microsoft Flight Simulator. Fairness in Machine Learning — Draft text for a book on the subject. The Social Architecture of Impactful Communities — A really good set of models for communities. Individuals […]
 
Four Short Links: 19 August 2020
The Design Space of Computational Notebooks — Looked at 60 notebook systems and grouped 10 design space dimensions into four major stages of a data science workflow: importing data into notebooks (data sources), editing code and prose (editor style, supported programming languages, versioning, collaboration), running code to generate outputs (cell execution order, liveness [6], execution […]
 
Why Best-of-Breed is a Better Choice than All-in-One Platforms for Data Science
So you need to redesign your company’s data infrastructure. Do you buy a solution from a big integration company like IBM, Cloudera, or Amazon?  Do you engage many small startups, each focused on one part of the problem?  A little of both?  We see trends shifting towards focused best-of-breed platforms. That is, products that are […]
 
Four short links: 14 August 2020
Sinter — Sinter uses the user-mode EndpointSecurity API to subscribe to and receive authorization callbacks from the macOS kernel, for a set of security-relevant event types. The current version of Sinter supports allowing/denying process executions; in future versions we intend to support other types of events such as file, socket, and kernel events. Inspired by […]
 
The Least Liked Programming Languages
StackOverflow’s 2020 developer survey included a table showing the  “most loved, dreaded, and wanted languages.” Loved and wanted languages are, well, sort of boring. The programming languages we dread are a lot more interesting. As Tolstoy said, “All happy families are alike; each unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.” So what are these […]
 
Four short links: 11 Aug 2020
ImmuDB — lightweight, high-speed immutable database for systems and applications. Open Source and easy to integrate into any existing application. Latest version provides multitenancy. Smart Mask — (CNN) Japanese startup Donut Robotics […] created a smart mask — a high-tech upgrade to standard face coverings, designed to make communication and social distancing easier. In conjunction […]
 
Four short links: 7 Aug 2020
Surprising Economics of Load-Balanced Systems — I have a system with c servers, each of which can only handle a single concurrent request, and has no internal queuing. The servers sit behind a load balancer, which contains an infinite queue. An unlimited number of clients offer c * 0.8 requests per second to the load […]
 
Four short links: 5 August 2020
Tales of the Autistic Developer – Senior Developer — Interesting article from a senior developer with Autism Spectrum Disorder. They talk about the problems it causes, how they solved each problem, and how those problems even became strengths. You can’t read this and not have more empathy for neurodiverse programmers. NyanSat: The Open Source LEO […]
 
Radar trends to watch: August 2020
I thought July was going to be a dull month, but I’m wrong again. COVID-specific technology seems to be drying up, though there’s a fascinating report about a DIY vaccine. (Developed by serious scientists, so don’t try this at home.) There’s a lot of news about AI, and specifically, about the GPT-2 and GPT-3 language […]
 
Four short links: 31 July 2020
Migrating a 40TB SQL Server Database — A horror story to tell around the campfire. I was struck by the observation in this Hacker News comment that It’s typical that a log will be accessed zero times. Collecting, aggregating, and indexing logs is usually a mistake made by people who aren’t clear on the use […]
 
Four short links: 30 July 2020
Turning the IDE Inside Out with Datalog — tl;dr: I made a prototype IDE in which language semantics are specified in datalog, powered by a datalog interpreter written in TypeScript, running the browser. Demo here. Luckysheet — Open source web spreadsheet. Introducing the Model Card Toolkit for Easier Model Transparency Reporting — Model Cards […] […]
 
Four short links: 29 July 2020
The Golden Rule of Software Quality — Prefer to push fixes upstream instead of working around problems downstream. That is to say: if you find a shortcoming in a package you use, then you should fix it and contribute your fix to that package. Don’t simply workaround it in your code. The Coining of the […]
 
Bringing an AI Product to Market
The Core Responsibilities of the AI Product Manager Product Managers are responsible for the successful development, testing, release, and adoption of a product, and for leading the team that implements those milestones. Product managers for AI must satisfy these same responsibilities, tuned for the AI lifecycle. In the first two articles in this series, we […]
 
Power, Harms, and Data
A recent article in The Verge discussed PULSE, an algorithm for “upsampling” digital images. PULSE, when applied to a low-resolution image of Barack Obama, recreated a White man’s face; applied to Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, it built a White woman’s face.  It had similar problems with other images of Black and Hispanic people, frequently giving them White […]
 
Four short links: 27 July 2020
Tech Regulation — ‘Tech’, of course, has all of this complexity, but we’re having to work this out a lot more quickly. It took 75 years for seatbelts to become compulsory, but tech has gone from interesting to crucial only in the last five to ten years. That speed means we have to form opinions […]
 
Four short links: 24 July 2020
How Taiwan’s Unlikely Digital Minister Hacked the Pandemic — Taiwan and Audrey Tang occupy a unique spot in a world, where the ascendance of the internet and digital technology is marked by the twin dystopias of “post-truth” information chaos in the United States and China’s totalitarian, technologically mediated surveillance-and-censorship regime. With Audrey Tang as the […]
 
Four short links: 26 July 2020
As We May Code — why aren’t we — ostensibly the people writing software — doing more with AI in our day-to-day? Why are things like TabNine and Kite so often seen as curiosities instead of game-changers? If you take seriously the idea that ai will fundamentally change the nature of many occupations in the […]
 
Four short links: 22 July 2020
wiki.js — Portable open-source Javascript featureful wiki. Neural Embedding + Locality Sensitive Hashing for Logs — Our diff solution involves embedding each line into a low dimensional vector and (optionally “fine-tuning” or updating the embedding model at the same time), assigning it to a cluster, and identifying lines in different clusters as “different”. Locality sensitive […]
 
AI, Protests, and Justice
Largely on the impetus of the Black Lives Matter movement, the public’s response to the murder of George Floyd, and the subsequent demonstrations, we’ve seen increased concern about the use of facial identification in policing. First, in a highly publicized wave of announcements, IBM, Microsoft, and Amazon have announced that they will not sell face […]
 
Four short links: 21 July 2020
22 Principles for Great Product Managers — This list—pieced together over the past few years—reflects what I believe are some of the most important principles for product managers. Tempering Expectations of GPT-3 and AGI — When I was curating my generated tweets, I estimated 30-40% of the tweets were usable comedically, a massive improvement over […]
 
Four short links: 20 July 2020
A Bug-Sized Camera for Bug-Sized Robots and Bug-Sized Bugs — With a focus on small size and efficiency, they started with an off-the-shelf ultra low-power image sensor that’s 2.3 mm wide and weighs 6.7 mg. They stuck on a Bluetooth 5.0 chip (3 mm wide, 6.8 mg), and had a fun time connecting those two […]
 
Four short links: 17 July 2020
Matters Computational: Ideas, Algorithms, Source Code — Interesting book about how to do things at the low level. This is a book for the computationalist, whether a working programmer or anyone interested in methods of computation. The focus is on material that does not usually appear in textbooks on algorithms. It’s the kind of book […]
 
Four short links: 16 July 2020
Pseudogen — [open source] tool to automatically generate pseudo-code from source code. Implements Learning to Generate Pseudo-code from Source Code using Statistical Machine Translation and is written up in Pseudogen: A Tool to Automatically Generate Pseudo-code from Source Code. Exciting work for people inheriting codebases, and perhaps the first step in automated reasoning about code […]
 
Microservices Adoption in 2020
Microservices seem to be everywhere. Scratch that: talk about microservices seems to be everywhere. And that’s the problem. Thinkers as dissimilar as Plato, Robert Boyle, and Keith Richards tend to agree about one thing: Talk is cheap. So we wanted to determine to what extent, and how, O’Reilly subscribers are empirically using microservices. In other words, how long have people been using them? What […]
 
