Boris Johnson talks about his six children and changing nappiesBoris Johnson has told US media he has six children and changes "a lot of nappies" for his youngest, 17-month-old son Wilfred.The UK prime minister rarely talks about family life or his children in response to questions.Mr Johnson, whose third wife Carrie is currently expecting the couple's second child, said it was "fantastic" having a baby living in Downing Street.But it was "a lot of work", he told NBC's Today show.Mr Johnson, who is in the United States for a White House meeting with President Joe Biden, was questioned by interviewer Savannah Guthrie about issues including Covid and Afghanistan, before the discussion moved on to more personal topics.Asked whether he had six children, the prime minister replied: "Yes."And on having a young son living with him in Downing Street, Mr Johnson said: "It's fantastic. Well, you know, it's a lot of work. It's a lot of work, I'll tell you that much."But I love it. I absolutely love it. I change a lot of nappies."Mr Johnson has four grown-up children with second wife Marina Wheeler, a daughter from an affair and a son with his current wife.Mrs Johnson announced in July this year that she was pregnant again.At the first meeting of his reshuffled cabinet last week, the prime minister reportedly joked that he had "seen a few delivery rooms, probably seen as many delivery rooms as anybody in this [room]... with the possible exception of [House of Commons Leader] Jacob [Rees-Mogg]", who has six children.France and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pactThe deal caused outrage in France, which lost a contract to build submarines for Australia.Covid could be more like cold by spring - expertWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?How Germans will look back on Angela MerkelImages of Haitians at US border echo grim pastWhy China looks to be on the way back to socialismWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?No-go zones and Russian meddling in Central Africa warThe edible insects coming to a supermarket near youFact-checking President Bolsonaro's UN speechBBC Culture: Striking photos of a lesser-seen IranHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?'Side-eying Chloe', 10, to sell viral meme as NFT1France and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pact2Lithuania urges people to throw away Chinese phones3Three die in dry-ice incident at Moscow pool party4What do we know about Gabby Petito's boyfriend?5Why China looks to be on the way back to socialism6PM: Humanity reaching a turning point on climate7Sabina Nessa killed on short walk to meet friend8Eleven jailed over Morocco gang-rape and torture9Evergrande shares jump as debt deadline looms10© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.