Coronavirus: Social gatherings above six banned in England from 14 September
A new legal limit will be enforced through a £100 fine but will not apply to schools or workplaces.
 
Brexit: PM defends planned changes to Withdrawal Agreement
The government publishes a bill which overwrites key parts of the Withdrawal Agreement with the EU.
 
East Finchley shooting: Fifth murder trial finds man guilty
Annie Besala Ekofo and her nephew Bervil Kalikaka-Ekofo were shot dead in East Finchley in 2016.
 
Coronavirus: People without symptoms 'misusing testing'
The health secretary says 'inappropriate' use was making it harder for people to get tested.
 
Manchester Arena Inquiry: 'Confusion over gunman' at attack
The Manchester attack inquiry hears about incorrect reports of an "active shooter" at the scene.
 
Doncaster races told to go behind closed doors
Doncaster Racecourse is told by local health officials to stop spectators attending its St Leger meeting after Wednesday's opening day.
 
Moria migrants: Fire destroys Greece's camp on Lesbos
Nearly 13,000 migrants lived at the camp on the island of Lesbos - four times the number it can hold.
 
Grenfell Fire: Cladding firm 'confused' by safety rules
The company's director says he made a "wrong" assumption about what materials were approved for use.
 
Coronavirus: Oxford University vaccine trial paused after participant falls ill
AstraZeneca describes the pause in its keenly-awaited final clinical trials as routine.
 
Amazon pays £290m in UK tax as sales surge to £14bn
The tech giant has faced scrutiny over its UK tax bill, but says it pays "all taxes required".
 
Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe: New charge 'a political game', says husband
The British-Iranian woman in jail in Iran is facing a new trial as she nears the end of her sentence.
 
Belarus: Nobel Laureate Alexievich visited by diplomats amid 'harassment'
European diplomats gather with Svetlana Alexievich after she said masked men tried to enter her home.
 
Stormzy dedicates Superheroes video to Black Panther's Chadwick Boseman
The British rapper says the late actor is "forever a superhero in our hearts".
 
Thwaites: 'Doomsday Glacier' vulnerability seen in new maps
Sea and airborne surveys show how Antarctica's mighty Thwaites ice stream can be melted from below.
 
Kim Kardashian announces end of long-running hit reality show
Keeping Up With The Kardashians, which ran for 14 years, made the family global mega-stars.
 
US wildfires leave small towns almost destroyed in California and Washington
It's estimated that nearly 80% of structures in Malden, Washington state, have been lost.
 
Garrick Club faces legal battle over 'gentleman-only policy'
Emily Bendell argues men-only membership rules are a breach of equality legislation.
 
Oscars: Only diverse films will be considered for best picture
Films that want to be nominated for the top prize must meet at least two of four new criteria.
 
Singapore: The mums asking suicidal teens to 'please stay'
Singaporean mothers who lost children to suicide have formed a group to help other at-risk youths.
 
Coronavirus R0: What is the R number and why does it matter?
Experts keep discussing the value of R, but what is it and why does it matter?
 
