Net zero announcement: UK sets out plans to cut greenhouse gas emissions
The government reveals its long-awaited strategy days before global leaders meet for COP26 in Glasgow.
 
Heat pump grants worth £5,000 to replace gas boilers not enough, say critics
The England and Wales subsidies cover just 90,000 gas boilers out of more than 20 million households.
 
Lord Janner: Police shut down MP child abuse investigations - report
An inquiry finds police seemed "reluctant to investigate" claims against former MP Lord Janner.
 
Manchester Arena Inquiry: Bomber's brother leaves UK before hearing
The Manchester Arena bomber's brother Ismail Abedi has been ordered to appear as a witness.
 
'Heaviest' kidneys removed in high-risk operation
Warren Higgs speaks before and after having his kidneys, which weighed more than five stone (35kg), removed.
 
Covid-19: New mutation of Delta variant under close watch in UK
Scientists are studying it to better understand how much of a threat it may pose.
 
Greater Manchester Police officer charged with child abuse offences
Det Con Lee Cunliffe is charged with 11 offences following a police investigation.
 
Southeastern and Avanti West Coast trains severely disrupted
Urgent track repairs are affecting services between Kent and Sussex, and London Charing Cross.
 
Arrest after Nottinghamshire women report nightclub needle attacks
Ellie Simpson says her sister felt "a pinch on the back of her arm" as she left a nightclub.
 
Polish PM accuses EU of blackmail as row over rule of law escalates
Mateusz Morawiecki clashes with EU leaders over a Polish court ruling that rejected parts of EU law.
 
Alta Fixsler: Toddler dies in hospice after parents' legal battle fails
A judge ruled Alta Fixsler's life support should be withdrawn in a hospice rather than at home.
 
Channel 4 subtitles and other services not likely to return until mid-November
A catastrophic fault knocked out subtitles, signing and audio description more than three weeks ago.
 
Life at 50C: The Baghdad traffic cop who works in 50C heat
In Baghdad, Sergeant Saa’d has to brave increasingly extreme conditions to keep the city moving.
 
Little Amal: War Horse creators' refugee puppet lands in the UK
The 3.5m high puppet of a Syrian refugee child begins the last leg of her trans-European trek.
 
Covid: Australia's Flying Doctors take vaccines to vast remote areas
The famed service is helping solve the immense challenge of vaccinating remote Australia.
 
Kanye West officially changes his name to Ye
The rapper's name has been officially changed after a request to a Los Angeles court.
 
Diver finds 900-year-old crusader sword off Israel's coast
The blade, which is encrusted with marine organisms, is believed to be about 900 years old.
 
The battle to make lighter life-saving body armour
New materials are making body armour lighter but nanotechnology could provide a breakthrough.
 
Greta Thunberg sings Rick Astley hit at climate concert
Greta Thunberg sings Rick Astley's "Never Gonna Give You Up" to launch series of climate concerts.
 
How Cameron Norrie made his rapid rise in tennis
As Cameron Norrie celebrates his Indian Wells victory, BBC tennis correspondent Russell Fuller looks at the British number one's rapid rise up the rankings.
 
Heat pumps: How much do they cost and how do they work?
The government wants people to replace gas boilers with heat pumps.
 
Covid: Why are UK cases so high?
The UK has higher infections than most of its neighbours, as scientists fear a difficult winter.
 
'I keep crying over David's Southend dream coming true'
Southend is to become a city in honour of Sir David Amess, but what will it mean for people there?
 
Eric Zemmour: Far-right journalist cast as Macron election rival
Eric Zemmour - tipped to run for the French presidency - is rebranding far-right nationalism.
 
The shortages hitting countries around the world
People and businesses across the world are facing shortages of everything from coal to coffee.
 
What are the Delta, Gamma, Beta and Alpha Covid variants?
UK officials are keeping a close watch on a new descendent of the Delta variant of Covid.
 
Friendship Games 1984: When Great Britain took part in the 'Iron Curtain Olympics'
Steroids, the threat of nuclear war and... lost luggage. A small team of female British athletes went to the Friendship Games of 1984.
 
Narendra Modi: 'Why is the Indian PM's photo on my Covid vaccine certificate?'
A 62-year-old Indian wants a new Covid-19 vaccine certificate without Narendra Modi's photograph.
 
Covid: Is the pace of the vaccine booster rollout too slow?
Critics worry the rollout is happening too slowly in England to best protect people ahead of winter.
 
Colin Powell: From Vietnam vet to secretary of state
The US secretary of state whose support for George W Bush gave credibility to the 2003 Iraq invasion.
 
Scotland beat PNG to close in on T20 World Cup qualification
Scotland take a big step towards qualifying for the Super 12s stage of the Men's T20 World Cup with a second win in three days.
 
UK and Republic of Ireland World Cup bid for 2030 not 'up in smoke'
A UK and Republic of Ireland bid to host the 2030 World Cup bid has not "gone up in smoke" after England's Euro 2020 final trouble, MPs have been told.
 
'I'm standing with you' - Powell, Saka and the importance of black England role models
BBC Sport talks to several black leaders in the England men's football set-up about the importance of role models.
 
Fenton & Stacey reach world all-around final but Downie misses out on beam and uneven bars
Britain's Georgia-Mae Fenton and 16-year-old Ruby Stacey are through to the all-around final of the Artistic World Championships, while Becky Downie fails to advance.
 
Champions League: Paris St-Germain, Mauricio Pochettino, Lionel Messi, Kylian Mbappe and Neymar
BBC Sport analyses the task facing Mauricio Pochettino at Paris St-Germain, as he attempts to turn a squad of superstars into a team that can win the Champions League.
 
Climate change: Is the UK on track to meet its targets?
With weeks to go until the UK hosts a global climate summit, is the government on track to meet its own commitments?
 
What is net zero and how are the UK and other countries doing?
Experts have recommended developed countries adopt targets to reduce emissions to net zero by 2050.
 
COP26: Does a climate summit need 25,000 people? And more questions
BBC science correspondent Matt McGrath answers your questions about Glasgow's COP26 climate summit.
 
The climate activists who want Norway to end oil and gas production
The BBC's Nick Beake meets the young climate activists trying to stop Norway drilling for oil and gas.
 
COP26: What is the Glasgow climate conference and why is it important?
A crucial climate change summit is being held in the UK - this is why it's important.
 
How energy flexibility can save us money and cut carbon
Making energy supply to homes and businesses more flexible could help the UK meet its climate goals.
 
What is climate change? A really simple guide
World temperatures are rising because of human activity, and climate change now threatens every aspect of human life.
 
Why China's climate policy matters to us all
The global battle against climate change is likely to be won or lost in China.
 
What we know so far
What happened, what we know about the suspect, who the MP was, and what witnesses saw.
 
Our families fear for our personal safety, say MPs
MPs have described their experience of threats to their safety as tributes are paid to Sir David Amess.
 
Sir David Amess death: Mural appears at Leigh-on-Sea skatepark
The artist who sprayed the tribute says it is a "thank you from this community" to the MP.
 
Sir David Amess killing: Should MPs still be able to meet the public?
The home secretary is reviewing MPs' security but says they must remain accessible to voters.
 
Sir David Amess: Political world pays tribute to much-loved MP
Sir David Amess has been described as "one of the kindest, most gentle people in politics".
 
Sir David Amess killing casts shadow over Leigh-on-Sea constituency
Constituents in Leigh-on-Sea mourn Sir David Amess as they try to make sense of what happened.
 
Sir David Amess: Boris Johnson leads tributes to much-loved MP
Friends and colleagues remember Essex MP David Amess's "wonderful smile" and "photographic memory".
 
Boris Johnson pays tribute to Conservative MP Sir David Amess
Boris Johnson said Sir David Amess was one of the "kindest, nicest, most gentle people in politics".
 
Candlelit vigil in honour of MP
Hundreds of people carrying lanterns and candles gathered in Leigh-on-Sea to pay their respects.
 
Sir David Amess: Prevent scheme needs urgent work, says Robert Buckland
The strategy aimed at stopping people becoming terrorists needs improving, Robert Buckland says.
 
Sir David Amess: How a tragic day unfolded
How constituents and authorities reacted to the tragic killing of Sir David Amess.
 
Sir David Amess: Fun, friendly and always outspoken
The Tory MP was a backbencher of the old school who fought for the causes he cared about.
 
I get abuse and threats online - why can't it be stopped?
Online abuse against women is on the rise, but why aren't the police, government and social media sites doing more to stop it?
 
Black scientists say UK research is institutionally racist
Senior black scientists tell the BBC they believe UK science to be "institutionally racist".
 
Drugs, arms, and terror: A high-profile defector on Kim's North Korea
A former colonel describes a leadership making cash by any means, from drug factories to illegal arms deals.
 
'How I escaped a hidden world of gangs and exploitation'
Aliyah's smile conceals a lifetime of abuse - and experts warn her experience is all too common among a forgotten group of girls.
 
One of the darkest moments in Brazilian football - and the divide that still runs deep
A home Copa America in 1989 became a flashpoint in north-eastern Brazil's persistent struggles with prejudice and poverty.
 
