US lifting ban on imports of British lamb, says Boris Johnson
The PM says farmers can export to the US, and insists the chances of a wider trade deal are not fading.
 
Gas crisis: Energy regulator warns more customers face hit
Ofgem boss says "well above" hundreds of thousands of customers will have to move supplier as firms fold.
 
PMQs: Angela Rayner faces Dominic Raab over cost of living rises
Labour's deputy tells Mr Raab to "go back to his sun lounger and let me take over" as the stand-ins face each other at PMQs.
 
Joe Biden plays down chances of UK-US trade deal
The US president's comments come as he meets Boris Johnson for talks in the White House.
 
Premier League grounds to trial standing areas in January
Manchester United, Manchester City, Liverpool and Chelsea are among those expected to apply to take part.
 
Sharon Graham: Unite leader to skip Labour conference
Sharon Graham insists she is not snubbing party leader Keir Starmer but it's a matter of priorities.
 
Starmer warned Labour leadership rule changes risk 'civil war'
New leader of the Unite union Sharon Graham criticises proposals to change the rules to elect future a Labour leader.
 
Gas price crisis: Food firms face huge price rise for carbon dioxide
The US supplier of CO2, which will receive millions in UK taxpayer support to reopen, will hike prices.
 
'No clear end to HS2 cost and delays' say MPs
The Public Accounts Committee is "increasingly alarmed" about key parts of the rail project.
 
Tories reverse decision to ban Covid families group from conference
The group says ministers are trying to avoid them after they were told they could not go to Tory conference.
 
Johnson aides knew he had crush on me, says Jennifer Arcuri
US businesswoman Jennifer Arcuri went on trade trips with the PM during his time as London mayor.
 
Catalogue of errors led to £1bn of state pension underpayments
The National Audit Office says 134,000 pensioners, mostly women, were affected by a preventable scandal.
 
Boris Johnson talks about his six children and changing nappies
Boris Johnson says he loves having his youngest child, 17-month-old son Wilfred, at 10 Downing Street.
 
Boris Johnson dismisses fears over tough winter
The prime minister says the surge in energy prices and supply chain problems are "short-term" issues.
 
Call to extend paid leave for miscarriage before 24 weeks
An MP wants women and their partners to get three days paid leave if a pregnancy ends before 24 weeks.
 
Harry Dunn: Liz Truss raises case with US at United Nations Assembly
Foreign Secretary Liz Truss speaks to the US Secretary of State about "delivering justice".
 
Afghanistan: Defence secretary angered over data breach
Ben Wallace apologises to Afghan interpreters, mistakenly copied into an email, as one person is suspended.
 
Government borrowing higher than expected in August
Borrowing was lower than a year earlier, but was still the second-highest on record for August.
 
Rich nations must increase climate support funds, says Boris Johnson
The UK prime minister says he is "increasingly frustrated" at support offered to poorer countries.
 
MP Rosie Duffield wants meeting with Sir Keir Starmer over transgender debate
Rosie Duffield - who has been criticised by trans rights activists - says Labour's position isn't clear.
 
Aukus: France pulls out of UK defence talks amid row
Paris is angry after Australia cancelled a submarine contract in favour of a deal with the UK and US.
 
Labour pledges crackdown on private equity
The shadow chancellor says closing a tax "loophole" on fund managers' earnings could raise £440m a year.
 
Gas crisis: No chance lights will go out, says government
Business secretary Kwasi Kwarteng says the UK has "more than sufficient capacity" amid gas price spike.
 
Nancy Pelosi gifts US flag to Chorley for hosting G7 summit
The Lancashire town has welcomed politicians from around the world for the G7 Speakers' Summit.
 
Aukus: Truss defends security deal amid criticism
The deal will make the UK safer and could create hundreds of jobs, the new foreign secretary says.
 
Boris Johnson on UK-US trade deal and exporting British goods
But the Biden administration isn't doing free trade deals around the world “right now”, the UK PM says.
 
Tim Davie on political views when appointing news staff
The BBC's director general Tim Davie, is questioned on how BBC News its selects senior staff.
 
Ben Wallace on action over Afghan data breach reveals personal details
Ben Wallace tells MPs it is an "understatement" he was angered over an email giving personal details of Afghan translators.
 
Boris Johnson on wages, prices and supermarket shortages
The prime minister says he does “not believe people will be short of food” amid reports of some empty supermarket shelves.
 
Kwasi Kwarteng on gas prices: No question of the lights going out
Any talk of an energy supply emergency is alarmist and completely misguided, the business and energy secretary says.
 
BBC specialists look at the prospects for UK-US trade
Our correspondents ask what Boris Johnson's trip to the US reveals about the prospects for UK-US trade.
 
Universal credit: When will the £20 increase stop?
The government has confirmed the £20 boost will end in the autumn.
 
Nadine Dorries: Best-selling author, nurse, reality star and, now, cabinet minister
Mistrusted by some in the arts, the new culture secretary is said by a colleague to be "up for the fight".
 
Lib Dem conference: Sir Ed Davey gambles on targeting Tories
The Lib Dems are facing a battle to get heard at their online conference but they are in good spirits.
 
Cabinet reshuffle 2021: Who is in Boris Johnson's new cabinet?
Prime Minister Boris Johnson reshuffles his cabinet for the first time since February 2020. Who's in it now?
 
Party political conferences: What to expect this year
Our guide to what conferences are, when and where they're taking place, and what's likely to happen.
 
Liberal Democrats: Is Ed Davey sticking to his promises?
We look at the performance of the party and its leader as the Lib Dem conference gets going.
 
Michael Gove: What will he do with beefed-up planning and levelling up job?
Michael Gove is known as a reformer and is now in charge of controversial planning changes.
 
Nadhim Zahawi: Iraqi refugee to education secretary
Iraqi refugee, Teletubby merchandise salesman, pollster, millionaire - meet the new education secretary.
 
Cabinet reshuffle: Where did it go wrong for Gavin Williamson?
The reshuffle has seen the removal of an education secretary much criticised during the pandemic.
 
Liz Truss: Fast tracker who landed prime cabinet role
The life of the new foreign secretary, from left-wing parents to the top of the Conservative Party.
 
Who is Dominic Raab? Karate black-belt who is no stranger to controversy
The Conservative MP loses his job at the foreign office but becomes deputy PM and justice secretary.
 
Will Boris Johnson’s plan for the NHS work?
The prime minister believes new funds will tackle the Covid backlog - but refuses to set targets.
 
National Insurance: What’s the new Health and Social Care tax and how will it affect me?
A new health and social care tax is being introduced, Boris Johnson has announced.
 
Social care: Will people still have to sell their homes?
In 2019, the Conservatives pledged no-one should have to sell their home to pay for their care.
 
Patrick Harvie and Lorna Slater: Who are the new Green ministers?
Patrick Harvie and Lorna Slater are the first Green politicians to hold ministerial office in the UK.
 
Lib Dem leader Ed Davey wants to target Tory heartlands
Smashing Tory dominance in the party's traditional areas is Liberal Democrats leader Ed Davey's plan. Can it work?
 
Levelling up: The seaside town debating what change is needed
As a report says levelling up plans must consider local views, people in Rhyl debate the changes needed.
 
