Asda to hire 15,000 workers ahead of ChristmasAsda has announced plans to recruit 15,000 extra staff for Christmas and says it is confident it can fill the roles amid record high job vacancies.The supermarket group said most of the temporary jobs would be based at its stores.Asda is seeking 500 workers for its depots and 1,500 people for home delivery over the festive period.Recent figures showed that job vacancies in the UK rose above one million in the three months to August.Data from the Office for National Statistics showed that there were 83,000 vacancies in the retail sector alone during that period.Asda is among a number of retailers seeking to hire seasonal workers. M&S wants to hire 12,000 temporary staff for Christmas while Boots is recruiting 5,500 workers.Online retail giant Amazon is offering one-off bonuses of up to £3,000 to attract staff for Christmas. It is searching for 20,000 workers across its UK network. Domino's Pizza also recently announced it was looking to hire 8,000 drivers in the UK and Ireland for the busy festive season.A spokesman for Asda said the supermarket was confident it would find people to take the temporary jobs. He said the 15,000 figure was "comparable with the figure we have recruited in prior years".He said Asda expected students to apply for the roles as well as people with children because many of the jobs offer flexible hours. Last month, the British Chambers of Commerce said that Brexit and Covid had driven a deep-seated decline in the supply of labour, adding that the UK was facing an "acute hiring crisis". Amazon offers £3,000 bonuses to attract staffDomino’s seeks 8,000 drivers before Christmas rushPolish PM accuses EU of blackmail in law rowMateusz Morawiecki clashes with EU leaders over a Polish court ruling that rejected parts of EU law.North Korea fires missile into waters off JapanTaliban urged to lift ban on girls' education. VideoTaliban urged to lift ban on girls' educationThe shortages hitting countries around the worldFar-right journalist poses new threat to Macron'Why is PM Modi's photo on my vaccine certificate?'Flying Doctors take vaccines to Australia's outback. VideoFlying Doctors take vaccines to Australia's outbackWhen Britain went to the 'Iron Curtain Olympics'The battle to make lighter life-saving body armourColin Powell: Vietnam vet to secretary of stateI get abuse and threats online - why can't it be stopped?BBC Future: The race to save New York's shipwrecksHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?1Polish PM accuses EU of blackmail in law row2US football coach fired for refusing vaccine3Diver finds crusader sword off Israel's coast4Why are UK Covid cases so high?5The shortages hitting countries around the world6New Delta Covid mutant under close watch in UK7Russia bans male 'extremist' group for online hate8North Korea fires missile into waters off Japan9Kanye West officially changes his name to Ye10Fears grow for girl missing from Australia campsite© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.