U.S. in contact with Haitian officials in effort to free kidnapped American missionariesAn earlier version of this article misspelled the name of the gang that’s believed to have kidnapped the missionaries. The name of the gang is 400 Mawozo. The article has been corrected.PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti — U.S. and senior Haitian officials worked Monday to free 17 members of an Ohio-based Christian aid organization kidnapped over the weekend in Haiti, while local unions and other groups launched a general strike to protest the worsening security and gang violence racking the poverty-stricken Caribbean nation.Analysts believe that the 400 Mawozo gang — notorious for mass kidnappings and ransoming religious groups — is behind the brazen abduction Saturday of 16 Americans and one Canadian from Christian Aid Ministries. The group, which includes five children, was ambushed in its vehicle while on a trip to visit an orphanage.The kidnapping is the latest in a series of crises that have left the nation reeling. Haiti is battling a surge in gang violence that has complicated efforts to get aid to communities shaken by an earthquake that killed more than 2,200 people in August. The power struggle that has followed the still-unsolved assassination of President Jovenel Moïse in July has eroded any semblance of rule of law.American missionaries and family members kidnapped in Haiti by ‘400 Mawozo’ gang, groups sayPresident Biden is receiving “regular updates” on the efforts of the State Department and the FBI to secure the release of the group, White House spokeswoman Jen Psaki said Monday. She said the U.S. Embassy in Port-au-Prince is “coordinating with local authorities and providing assistance to the families to resolve the situation.”The State Department has been in touch with Haitian officials, Christian Aid Ministries, the family members of those who were kidnapped and the Canadian government, spokesman Ned Price said.“This is something that we have treated with the utmost priority,” Price told reporters. He declined to say whether U.S. officials have made contact with the gang accused of carrying out the kidnapping.The general strike, called before the kidnapping, closed most businesses, including gas stations, and some schools. It left the streets of the Haitian capital largely deserted.“General strike, no commercial activities, no public transport, no fuel, no schools, no life,” tweeted Giuseppe Loprete, chief of the International Organization for Migration’s Haiti mission. “The population is exhausted. Instability, violence and chaos are pushing [people] to leave more than poverty.”Méhu Changeux, head of Haiti’s Association of Owners and Drivers, told The Washington Post that gangs frequently ambush buses, taxis and trucks full of merchandise, hold them for ransom and sometimes rape passengers. He said the strike would continue Tuesday, and if the government cannot bring security to the country, it should resign.“If on Wednesday we don’t hear back from the government, we will protest in the streets,” Changeux said.400 Mawozo controls parts of Ganthier in Croix-des-Bouquets, the area outside Port-au-Prince where the Christian Aid Ministries car was hijacked.Who is 400 Mawozo, the Haitian gang accused of kidnapping American missionaries?Haiti holds the grim status of having the world’s highest number of kidnappings per capita. 400 Mawozo was behind about 80 percent of abductions in the third quarter of 2021, according to Gédéon Jean, director of the Center for Analysis and Research in Human Rights in Port-au-Prince.Haitian authorities said Sunday that they sought to negotiate with 400 Mawozo’s reported second-in-command, Joly “Yonyon” Germine, who is in jail. The gang’s alleged leader, Wilson Joseph, is wanted by police on charges including murder and kidnapping.No group has yet publicly claimed responsibility for kidnapping the Christian Aid Ministries team or set a ransom for release. The U.S. government has a long-standing policy of not paying ransoms for American citizens.Haitians rich and poor have fallen victim to the kidnapping surge.Abductions by the busload: Haitians are being held hostage by a surge in kidnappingsPoliticians and police are too weak — or compromised — to intervene, leaving many Haitians afraid to leave their homes for work. A spike in hijackings of fuel trucks has caused a severe shortage of gas and electricity. Some victims are targeted; others are chance bystanders.The rise of gang violence has further traumatized another generation of Haitians. Thousands have been displaced this year, forced to live in overcrowded and unhygienic temporary shelters. Others have attempted treacherous journeys to seek asylum in the United States.The co-chairs of the House Haiti caucus reiterated calls on Monday for the United States to halt expulsions of Haitians at the U.S. border.Changeux said the U.S. government shares blame for the lack of security in Haiti. The vast majority of guns recovered in the Caribbean nation and submitted for tracing were manufactured in or imported from the United States, the U.S. Justice Department reported last year.Christian Aid Ministries has worked for years in Haiti, providing emergency services, running anti-poverty programs and spreading Christian teachings. Its American staff members returned to Haiti last year after being pulled out for nine months because of the political unrest.In a statement issued Monday, Christian Aid Ministries said it was in “earnest prayer.”“While we desire the safe release of our workers, we also desire that the kidnappers be transformed by the love of Jesus, the only true source of peace, joy and forgiveness,” it said.Haiti, formerly occupied by the United States and colonized by the French, is heavily dependent on international aid. Foreigners working in the humanitarian sector typically live in closed compounds and travel with security. Many countries and companies pulled out staffers in recent months as insecurity deepened.Jean Bertrand Banatte participated in Monday’s strike. The 49-year-old owns a bus that ferries passengers from Les Cayes, an urban area in southern Haiti that suffered major damage in August’s temblor, to Port-au-Prince.He said that gang members ambushed a truck that he rented as it passed through a neighborhood south of Port-au-Prince last week, stealing the $6,650 dollars worth of merchandise. He paid $4,000 to secure the release of the driver. The gang kept the truck.Banatte said the insecurity is exacerbating spiraling crises in the south, where people are already vulnerable because of the earthquake.“Our leaders do not understand us nor listen to us,” he said. “We have no other choice than to take matters into our own hands.”Coletta reported from Toronto. Berger reported from Washington. Anthony Faiola in Miami and Devlin Barrett and Maria Sacchetti in Washington contributed to this report.Haitian migrants thought Biden would welcome them. Now deported to Haiti, they have one mission: Leave again.A Haitian prosecutor sought charges against the prime minister in the president’s assassination. He was fired.In Haiti, a brutal reckoning over an all too familiar task: RebuildingThe most important news stories of the day, curated by Post editors and delivered every morning.By signing up you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy