Powell envisioned moving the GOP ‘close to the spirit of Lincoln.’ It embraced Trump’s view instead.
Republicans once saw the former Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman as the next Dwight D. Eisenhower, a potential presidential candidate who could unify a nation.
 
Rachel Levine, openly transgender health official, to be sworn in as four-star admiral
The former Pennsylvania health secretary will be sworn in Tuesday as the sixth four-star admiral in the history of the U.S. Public Health Service.
 
A man stole a Capitol Police officer’s baseball cap on Jan. 6, feds say. He wore it on his YouTube channel.
Witnesses said Darrell Neely boasted about stealing a Capitol Police officer's jacket, badge, name tag and baseball cap along with four china plates, feds say.
 
Can Trump use executive privilege to stall the Jan. 6 investigation?
Trump doesn't ultimately decide what is covered by executive privilege, but he could stall the process enough to damage the investigation.
 
What can happen to the Trump advisers who are ignoring the Jan. 6 subpoenas?
The special House committee investigating the Jan. 6 insurrection and former president Donald Trump’s role in it has taken a dramatic step to prosecute Steve Bannon for not complying with a subpoena. Here's how that works.
 
Republicans hail Delta’s vaccination policy — even as it goes further than Biden’s
They've pointed to its 90 percent vaccination rate as being proof you don't need vaccine mandates. Except Delta's policy is basically Biden's plus a $200-per-month penalty.
 
Emanuel touts support among Black leaders ahead of confirmation hearing for ambassador job. But senators have questions.
Emanuel claims to have a letter supporting him from the family of Laquan McDonald.
 
High-profile and fully vaccinated but immunocompromised: Colin Powell’s death wrongly seized upon to undermine utility of coronavirus vaccines
Powell, who was 84 and immunocompromised, fit perfectly into a demographic that remains vulnerable to infections despite vaccination.
 
What is Tommy Tuberville doing here?
The college football coach turned U.S. senator objected to Biden’s victory on Jan. 6. He’s not looking back. “I have no regrets,” he says.
 
Ad exaggerates potential impact of Biden estate-tax plan
A rancher claims that Biden's plan would force the sale of many family farms — but few farms face an estate-tax liability.
 
Trump sues to block records requested by Jan. 6 committee
The lawsuit argues that the records request is overly broad and has no legislative purpose.
 
New York Democratic leader apologizes after comparing Buffalo mayoral nominee India Walton to former KKK leader David Duke
Walton, a self-identified socialist, won the Democratic nomination for Buffalo mayor in June, in a victory over four-term incumbent Byron Brown.
 
Supreme Court reaffirms police protection by qualified immunity, a legal doctrine targeted in protests
The court’s rulings in favor of police in two cases suggest new political battles to come over the doctrine, advocates said.
 
Can Trump use executive privilege to stall the Jan. 6 investigation?
Trump doesn't ultimately decide what is covered by executive privilege, but he could stall the process enough to damage the investigation.
 
What can happen to the Trump advisers who are ignoring the Jan. 6 subpoenas?
The special House committee investigating the Jan. 6 insurrection and former president Donald Trump’s role in it has taken a dramatic step to prosecute Steve Bannon for not complying with a subpoena. Here's how that works.
 
Trump questioned for four hours in lawsuit from protesters allegedly assaulted by his guards
The former president could face other depositions in a raft of civil lawsuits now that he is out of office.
 
Justice Department asks Supreme Court to stop Texas abortion law
The Biden administration says the court must intervene to prevent an end run around its authority and the Constitution.
 
Covid has killed more active-duty police officers than 9/11 did
It has also killed more officers than died in felonious attacks in the past four years.
 
Powell praised by U.S. politicians from both parties as trailblazer, trusted adviser to presidents
George W. Bush called his former secretary of state “highly respected at home and abroad.”
 
Republicans hail Delta’s vaccination policy — even as it goes further than Biden’s
They've pointed to its 90 percent vaccination rate as being proof you don't need vaccine mandates. Except Delta's policy is basically Biden's plus a $200-per-month penalty.
 
Two veteran Democratic House members announce they will retire
The departures of Reps. David E. Price (D-N.C.) and Mike Doyle (D-Pa.) raise questions about whether veteran lawmakers are leaving because they fear power will return to the GOP.
 
A small part of the economy of a small state is poised to shape the future of the world
The coal industry employs a small fraction of West Virginians, but it is a much larger part of the state's culture.
 
Jan. 6 committee lays out legal arguments against Bannon’s subpoena defiance in private letter to his attorney
Chairman Bennie G. Thompson (D-Miss.) detailed why the panel rejects the former Trump adviser’s claim that he does not have to comply because the former president is asserting executive privilege.
 
