Microsoft365R: testers wanted
by Hong Ooi Microsoft365R author here. I've just updated the package on GitHub with the following features: Add support for shared mailboxes to get_business_outlook(). To access a shared mailbox, supply one of the arguments shared_mbox_id, shared_mbox_name or shared_mbox_email specifying the ID, displayname or email address of the mailbox respectively. Add support for Teams chats (including one-on-one, group and meeting chats). Use the list_chats() function to list the chats you're participating in, and the `get_chat()` function to retrieve a specific chat. A chat object has class ms_chat, which has similar methods to a channel: you can send, list and retrieve messages,...
 
AzureR update: new in May/June
by Hong Ooi This is a summary of the updates to AzureR family of packages in May and June 2021. AzureAuth Change the default caching behaviour to disable the cache if running inside Shiny. Update Shiny vignette to clean up redirect page after authenticating (thanks to Tyler Littlefield). Add a create_AzureR_dir function to create the caching directory manually. This can be useful not just for non-interactive sessions, but also Jupyter and R notebooks, which are not technically interactive in the sense that they cannot read user input from a console prompt. AzureGraph Add enhanced support for the paging API. Many...
 
Microsoft365R 2.1.0 with Outlook support now on CRAN
by Hong Ooi I’m happy to announce that Microsoft365R 2.1.0 is now on CRAN with Outlook email support! Here’s a quick summary of the new features: Send, reply to and forward emails, optionally composed with blastula or emayili Copy and move emails between folders Create, delete, copy and move folders Add, remove and download attachments Here’s a sample of how to write an email using blastula: library(Microsoft365R) # 1st one is for your personal Microsoft account # 2nd is for your work & school account outl 
 
Outlook client support in Microsoft365R available for beta test
by Hong Ooi This is an announcement that a beta Outlook email client is now part of the Microsoft365R package. You can install it from the GitHub repository with: devtools::install_github("Azure/Microsoft365R") The client provides the following features: Send, reply to and forward emails, optionally composed with blastula or emayili Copy and move emails between folders Create, delete, copy and move folders Add, remove and download attachments The plan is to submit this to CRAN sometime next month, after a period of public testing. Please give it a try and give me your feedback: either via email or by opening an issue...
 
Teams support in Microsoft365R
by Hong Ooi I’m happy to announce that version 2.0 of Microsoft365R, the R interface to Microsoft 365, is now on CRAN! This version adds support for Microsoft Teams, a much-requested feature. To access a team in Microsoft Teams, use the get_team() function and provide the team name or ID. You can also list the teams you’re in with list_teams(). These return objects of R6 class ms_team, which has methods for working with channels and drives. list_teams() team 
 
Microsoft365R: an R interface to the Microsoft 365 suite
I’m very happy to announce Microsoft365R, a package for working with the Microsoft 365 (formerly known as Office 365) suite of cloud services. Microsoft365R extends the interface to the Microsoft Graph API provided by the AzureGraph package to provide a lightweight yet powerful interface to SharePoint and OneDrive, with support for Teams and Outlook soon to come. Microsoft365R is now available on CRAN, or you can install the development version from GitHub with devtools::install_github("Azure/Microsoft365R"). Authentication The first time you call one of the Microsoft365R functions (see below), it will use your Internet browser to authenticate with Azure Active Directory (AAD),...
 
AzureCosmosR: interface to Azure Cosmos DB
by Hong Ooi Last week, I announced AzureCosmosR, an R interface to Azure Cosmos DB, a fully-managed NoSQL database service in Azure. This post gives a short rundown on the main features of AzureCosmosR. Explaining what Azure Cosmos DB is can be tricky, so here’s an excerpt from the official description: Azure Cosmos DB is a fully managed NoSQL database for modern app development. Single-digit millisecond response times, and automatic and instant scalability, guarantee speed at any scale. Business continuity is assured with SLA-backed availability and enterprise-grade security. App development is faster and more productive thanks to turnkey multi region...
 
What's new with AzureR
by Hong Ooi This is an update on what’s been happening with the AzureR suite of packages. First, you may have noticed that just before the holiday season, the packages were updated on CRAN to change their maintainer email to a non-Microsoft address. This is because I’ve left Microsoft for a role at Westpac bank here in Australia; while I’m sad to be leaving, I do intend to continue maintaining and updating the packages. To that end, here are the changes that have recently been submitted to CRAN, or will be shortly: AzureAuth now allows obtaining tokens for the “organizations”...
 
Azure Functions with R and plumber
Azure Functions is a cloud service that allows you to deploy “serverless” microservices that are triggered by events (timers, HTTP POST events, etc) and automatically scale to serve demand while minimizing latency. The service natively supports functions written in C#, Java, JavaScript, PowerShell, Python and TypeScript, and now supports other languages as well thanks to the launch last week of custom handlers for Azure Functions. A new tutorial walks you through the process of creating a custom handler for a “hello world” R function. The process is fairly straightforward: use a couple of Azure CLI commands to set up a...
 
R at Microsoft
I was my great pleasure yesterday to be a presenter in the "Why R Webinar" series, on the topic R at Microsoft. In the talk (which you can watch below) I recounted the history of Microsoft's acquisition of Revolution Analytics, and the various way the Microsoft supports R: its membership of the R Consortium, integration with many products (including demos of Azure ML Service with GitHub Actions, and Azure Functions), and how Microsoft has driven adoption of R in large organizations by making R "IT approved". Many thanks to the Why R Foundation for hosting the talk, and to everyone...
 
