Gas crisis: Energy regulator warns more customers face hit
Ofgem boss says "well above" hundreds of thousands of customers will have to move supplier as firms fold.
 
US lifting ban on imports of British lamb, says Boris Johnson
The PM says farmers can export to the US, and insists the chances of a wider trade deal are not fading.
 
Killamarsh: Man in court charged with murdering three children and woman
Damien Bendall is accused of murdering Terri Harris and three children at a house in Derbyshire.
 
Insulate Britain: Injunction granted against M25 protesters
National Highways wins a High Court ruling against protesters who have been disrupting the M25.
 
Netflix lands golden ticket by buying Roald Dahl estate
The streaming giant will own and control works like Charlie and the Chocolate Factory and Matilda.
 
Derby County officially enter administration and are deducted 12 points
Championship side Derby County enter administration and are deducted 12 points by the English Football League.
 
Covid: Immune therapy from llamas shows promise
An immune therapy derived from llama blood shows 'exciting potential' in early coronavirus trials.
 
Fraudsters steal £4m a day as crime surges
Total losses through fraud rockets by 30% in the first half of the year, with many victims not refunded.
 
Willie Garson: Sex and the City actors remember late co-star
The actor, who has died aged 57, was known for his role as Stanford Blatch in the series and films.
 
Teen inmate whose baby died in prison was failed, report says
Inspectors say the death of the newborn baby at HMP Bronzefield "should never have happened'.
 
Trump sues niece and New York Times over tax story
A lawsuit accuses Mary Trump and reporters of an "insidious plot" to obtain confidential documents.
 
Quarter of a million pupils to join BBC's Share Your Story
BBC stars and staff invite teenagers to share their stories to help recover from the pandemic.
 
Seaside suburb inspires worldwide photo collaboration
Photographers around the world worked together on a seafront exhibition in Portobello, Edinburgh.
 
Ros Atkins on... the UK's rising energy bills
Ros Atkins asks where the pressure began on the UK's energy industry.
 
Swimmers dodge jellyfish on four islands challenge
The "Salty Selkies" swam for more than six miles from the Bass Rock to Craigleith, Lamb and Fidra in the Firth of Forth.
 
Life at 50C: Heat hitting home in Australia
Cities like Sydney are already experiencing extremely hot days because of climate change.
 
PPE hospital masks find new life fighting plastic waste
All schools and colleges in Cornwall will be given litter pickers made from old hospital masks.
 
The Many Saints of Newark: Sopranos prequel impresses many critics
Michael Gandolfini plays a teenage Tony Soprano, who was portrayed by his father James on TV.
 
Museum of the Year: Colchester gallery Firstsite wins £100,000 prize
Alongside top exhibitions, its café became a canteen offering free school meals during the pandemic.
 
Harry Styles haunts Noel Gallagher with win at Ivor Novello Awards
It's eight years after Noel Gallagher praised the event because "clowns like One Direction" don't win.
 
Covid vaccine stockpiles: Could 241m doses go to waste?
Joe Biden wants more global vaccine equality but the US and other nations have not backed promises with action.
 
Afghanistan: 'I feel betrayed. We feel left behind'
An Afghan interpreter affected by an email data breach at the MoD says he feels betrayed by the UK.
 
Covishield: UK recognises Covid jab after India outcry
With more than 721 million doses administered so far, Covishield is India's most widely used vaccine.
 
World War Two: The brothers who fled Nazi occupation by kayak
The "Engelandvaarders" who paddled from the Netherlands to England 80 years ago.
 
Brexit: What trade deals has the UK done so far?
The chances of UK-US trade deal in the next few years have been played down - but what other agreements has the UK made?
 
Fifa 22 soundtrack: Why getting on it is a 'bucket list' moment
This is what it means to young artists to be featured on the playlist for the latest Fifa game.
 
German elections: Businesses face future without Merkel
Many companies in Germany are focused on short-term survival in the hope of medium-term revival.
 
COP 26: How much is the developing world getting to fight climate change?
Are rich countries living up to their climate promises to the developing world?
 
CEO Secrets: 'In my business, you eat what you kill'
Music executive Riki Bleau shares his business advice for our CEO Secrets series.
 
Abba's Bjorn Ulvaeus launches campaign to fix £500m music royalty problem
Bjorn Ulvaeus launches a campaign to ensure musicians don't miss out on unpaid royalties.
 
Barcelona: The toxic battle ripping apart a European giant
The tense battle between Barcelona president Joan Laporta and manager Ronald Koeman is tearing the club apart, writes Guillem Balague.
 
Fury's promoter Warren confident fight with Joshua will happen
Frank Warren says he is "confident" Tyson Fury's undisputed heavyweight title fight with Anthony Joshua will happen.
 
Premier League & Championship clubs can trial safe standing from January
Premier League and Championship clubs have been asked for expressions of interest to pilot safe standing this season.
 
Getafe 1-2 Atletico Madrid: Luis Suarez score twice as Atletico Madrid go top of La Liga.
Watch highlights as two late Luis Suarez goals help Atletico Madrid beat 10-man Getafe to go top of La Liga.
 
Alvarez and Plant trade blows as they promote unification bout
Saul 'Canelo' Alvarez and Caleb Plant's first press conference to promote their upcoming super-middleweight unification fight turns violent as the pair trade blows.
 
Back to school: How are pupils being kept Covid-safe?
Most 12 to 15-year-olds will be vaccinated at school, to help limit disruption to their education.
 
Is it safe to vaccinate our child? And other questions
We answer some of your questions about vaccinating 12-15 year-olds, the booster vaccine and other topics.
 
Travel update: What are the new rules for holidays in Europe and the US?
Eight countries have now moved from the UK's red travel lists, to the less restrictive amber.
 
Covid-19 in the UK: How many coronavirus cases are there in my area?
Explore the data on coronavirus in the UK and find out how many cases there are in your area.
 
Covid passports: How do I get one and when will I need it?
People in Scotland will need to be fully vaccinated to go to clubs, sporting events and concerts.
 
Covid rules: What's in England's 'Winter Plan'?
Lockdown rules have changed across the UK, but some restrictions remain in place.
 
Coronavirus: Where does the government borrow billions from?
How does it work when a government wants to borrow money, and when does it have to pay it back?
 
Universal credit: When will the £20 increase stop?
The government has confirmed the £20 boost will end in the autumn.
 
What are the travel rules for Spain, Portugal, Malta and other holiday hotspots?
What you need to know about going to Portugal, Spain, Greece, France, Malta, Italy and Turkey.
 
Covid: People are vaccinated - so why are there so many cases?
More than four out of five UK adults are now fully vaccinated, but daily case rates remain high.
 
Long Covid: What is it and what are the symptoms?
Significant numbers have had long-term problems after recovering from the original infection.
 
The torso in the Thames: A 20-year mystery
Twenty years ago, a young African boy was murdered and his torso was dumped in the Thames. It's the longest unsolved child murder case in the recent history of the Metropolitan Police.
 
Paul Rusesabagina: From Hotel Rwanda hero to convicted terrorist
Paul Rusesabagina, who was portrayed in Hotel Rwanda, has gone from national hero to enemy of the state.
 
Fake Paralympians boss: 'I didn't know about cheating'
The man fined for sending non-disabled athletes to the Sydney Paralympics breaks his silence.
 
Muriel Gardiner: The heiress who saved countless lives
Muriel Gardiner's courage fighting fascism in Austria inspired an Oscar-winning film. Who was she?
 
Hushpuppi - the Instagram influencer and international fraudster
How Nigerian Ramon Abbas went from a romance scammer to a so-called "Billionaire Gucci Master".
 
