Norway bow-and-arrow attacker killed five people with ‘stabbing weapon,’ police say
Police now say “illness” is the likely motive after calling it an apparent “terrorist act.”
 
India’s floods force couple to sail to their wedding in a giant cooking pot
"My father swam to the temple and my mother, grandmother and sisters used another pot," the groom said.
 
North Korea launched a short-range ballistic missile from a submarine, South says
Tuesday’s test, detected by Seoul and Tokyo, was the latest in a series conducted by Pyongyang in recent weeks.
 
Afghanistan’s war is over, but the Taliban faces a new hurdle: Enforcing the law — and protecting Afghans from ISIS
Transforming a village-based guerrilla insurgency into a national security force that can secure urban areas is proving challenging.
 
Chinese police say he killed two people in a land dispute. On the Internet, he was seen as another victim.
Ou Jinzhong's situation drew widespread sympathy, with many seeing him as having suffered from local government neglect until he was apparently pushed over the edge.
 
Australian territory leader slams Ted Cruz for vaccine mandate criticism: ‘You know nothing about us’
Michael Gunner, chief minister of the Northern Territory, took to Twitter to set Cruz straight on “a few facts” after the senator from Texas lamented the territory's vaccine mandate as “Covid tyranny.”
 
Israeli diver finds 900-year-old sword, said to be Crusader knight’s weapon, on Mediterranean seabed
A resident came across the roughly four-foot-long weapon while scuba diving Saturday off the Carmel coast in northern Israel.
 
Stripped naked, beaten, forced to shout ‘Viva Fidel!’: Inside Cuba’s crackdown on dissent
The crackdown hangs over Cubans as a major test of dissent looms: a Nov. 15 protest called by actors, artists and dissidents, backed by Cuban exiles but banned by the Cuban state.
 
How Germany’s far-right gained, even as it lost
The far-right AfD fared worse than its shock surge in 2017. But that doesn't mean it's a waning force.
 
Colombia is responsible in kidnapping and rape of female journalist, rights court says
In 2000, Colombian journalist Jineth Bedoya was kidnapped, beaten and gang-raped while reporting on paramilitaries during the country's armed conflict.
 
U.S. in contact with Haitian officials in effort to free kidnapped American missionaries
Local unions and other groups launched a general strike on Monday to protest the worsening instability and gang violence racking the poverty-stricken nation.
 
Myanmar’s military junta releases thousands of political prisoners
The move has been cast by some analysts as a gesture to placate Southeast Asian neighbors at a strategic and necessary moment.
 
U.N. to launch a polio vaccination campaign in Afghanistan with Taliban permission
The campaign, which will begin next month, will be the first to reach all children in Afghanistan in more than three years, UNICEF said.
 
Russia shutters its mission to NATO in retaliation for expulsion of its diplomats
Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said Monday that Russia is also suspending the operations of NATO’s information office and its liaison in Moscow.
 
Atlantic hurricane season has gone to sleep. Will it awaken?
The season could end early — but it’s far from a guarantee.
 
Who is 400 Mawozo, the Haitian gang accused of kidnapping American missionaries?
For Haitians rich and poor, gang violence and kidnappings for ransom have become a tragically common facet of life.
 
Prince William and Kate recycle outfits to highlight climate impact of fashion
British tabloids said the prince was “channeling James Bond” with his green velvet jacket at the Earthshot awards.
 
Colin L. Powell, former secretary of state and military leader, dies at 84
The Army general helped guide the U.S. military to victory in the 1991 Persian Gulf War as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He struggled a decade later over the U.S. invasion of Iraq as a beleaguered secretary of state under President George W. Bush.
 
Deadly floods, landslides bring south India monsoon death toll to 35, authorities say
After days of heavy rain, one local resident told a Kerala news channel, "the house has gone. Children have gone."
 
Spanish prime minister vows to abolish prostitution, saying it ‘enslaves’ women
Prostitution has boomed in Spain since the practice was decriminalized in 1995, but critics say the lack of regulation hurts sex workers.
 
IMF sees economic growth with higher inflation for Mideast
The International Monetary Fund says the Middle East is expected to see significant economic growth this year of around 4% after the turmoil wrought by the coronavirus pandemic
 
Protest strike shuts down Haiti amid search for missionaries
A protest strike has shuttered businesses, schools and public transportation in a new blow to Haiti’s anemic economy
 
Back to gravity: Russians talk about world's 1st space movie
A Russian actor and a film director who spent 12 days in orbit to make the world’s first movie in space say they were so thrilled with their experience on the International Space Station that they felt sorry to leave
 
Dutch prosecutors place Eritrean on most wanted list
Dutch authorities have placed an Eritrean on the Netherlands’ most-wanted list as they seek to prosecute him for his alleged involvement in large-scale human trafficking, abuse of migrants trying to reach Europe and extortion
 
Nearly 100 women sworn in as judges in Egypt judicial body
Nearly 100 women have become the first female judges to join Egypt’s State Council, one of the country’s main judicial bodies
 
