Boris Johnson at the UN fact-checkedPrime Minster Boris Johnson has been addressing the UN General Assembly, ahead of its 26th annual Climate Change Conference of the Parties (Cop26) next month.He made a number of claims - we have checked a selection.'We have cut our greenhouse gas emissions by 44% in the last 30 years while expanding our GDP by 78%'The prime minister is right about the general trends, but his figures are a bit out of date and do not reflect the extraordinary impact that the pandemic has had on both greenhouse gas emissions and GDP, the value of everything produced in the economy.His figure of a 44% cut in greenhouse gas emissions is correct for the period from 1990 to 2019. Covid led to a big fall in emissions, largely due to reduced use of transport, which means that the figure for 1990 to 2020 was a decline of 49%.Similarly, the figure of 78% for the expansion of GDP was 1990 to 2019 - the figure for 1990 to 2020 was only 60%.'When I was a kid we produced almost 80% of our electricity from coal... that percentage is now down to 2% or less'The UK has made huge progress in reducing the use of coal, which has been the key contributor to its reduction in emissions since 1990.Figures for 2020 show that 1.8% of UK electricity generation came from coal, so he's right about that.It's not clear what age Mr Johnson would describe himself as being a kid, although the figure for 1970 when he turned six was 72%, which was also the figure for 1990.'We produce more offshore wind than any other country'The UK does indeed have more installed offshore wind capacity than any other country with 10.4GW. The government has set a target of increasing that to 40GW by 2040.If the UK is to become "the Saudi Arabia of wind", as Mr Johnson described it in his UN speech, it has some catching up to do in onshore wind generation. The UK's 13.7GW of onshore capacity, puts it considerably behind the world's two largest overall wind energy producers: China, which has 272GW onshore and the US with 122GW. What claims do you want BBC Reality Check to investigate? Get in touchFrance and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pactThe deal caused outrage in France, which lost a contract to build submarines for Australia.Covid could be more like cold by spring - expertWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?How Germans will look back on Angela MerkelImages of Haitians at US border echo grim pastWhy China looks to be on the way back to socialismWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?No-go zones and Russian meddling in Central Africa warThe edible insects coming to a supermarket near youFact-checking President Bolsonaro's UN speechBBC Culture: Striking photos of a lesser-seen IranHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?'Side-eying Chloe', 10, to sell viral meme as NFT1France and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pact2Lithuania urges people to throw away Chinese phones3Three die in dry-ice incident at Moscow pool party4What do we know about Gabby Petito's boyfriend?5Why China looks to be on the way back to socialism6PM: Humanity reaching a turning point on climate7Sabina Nessa killed on short walk to meet friend8Eleven jailed over Morocco gang-rape and torture9Evergrande shares jump as debt deadline looms10© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.