Covid: People are vaccinated - so why are there so many cases?By Philippa RoxbyHealth reporterMore than four out of five adults in the UK have now had two jabs, but reported daily Covid cases remain high. Millions of people will get booster vaccines this autumn - while healthy children aged 12-15 are being offered single doses.Why are infections still high when so many are vaccinated?Vaccines are designed to protect people against becoming seriously ill or dying from Covid-19.They're less effective at stopping people getting infected by the virus or passing it on.Although the vaccine does reduce the likelihood of these things happening, it might only stop half of infected people from transmitting the virus.So even if everyone in the UK was double-vaccinated, Covid would still spread - but far fewer people would become seriously ill.Effectiveness also depends on how well each vaccine works against individual variants. Public Health England (PHE) studies suggest having two vaccine doses protects 80% of people against getting symptoms from the Delta variant. That's lower than the Alpha variant (89%) which seen initially, because Delta is more infectious. After four or five months, another large study suggests you have the same amount of protection whether you had AstraZeneca or Pfizer. Researchers don't yet have enough data to compare the Moderna jab, but believe it is "almost certainly at least as good as the others".Do vaccines prevent hospitalisation and death?Yes. Public Health England (PHE) studies found: But there will always be some deaths, particularly in the oldest and most vulnerable, because vaccines aren't perfect.Who will be offered a third jab?Across the UK, single booster jabs will be offered to:Booster doses will be offered at least six months after a second vaccination, and will typically be either Pfizer or Moderna.England's Deputy Chief Medical Officer, Jonathan Van-Tam, says people should also take a flu jab if it is offered alongside the booster.Which children will now be offered the vaccine?All 12 to 15-year-olds will be offered a single Pfizer Covid jab to help limit school disruption this winter. Most will be given in school.The rollout has already begun in England and Scotland. Invites are being sent out in Wales, while teen vaccinations are due to start in Northern Ireland in October.The UK's chief medical offers said a second dose shouldn't be considered before the spring term.Young people aged 16 and 17 are also being offered one dose, with the intention of a second at a later date. There is no vaccine currently approved for use in the under-12s in the UK.In England, adults and those within three months of turning 18 can book a jab online or by calling 119. They can also visit a walk-in clinic without an appointment. All 16 and 17-year-olds are asked to contact their GP.In Scotland, over-16s can register to get the vaccine on the NHS inform website or by calling 0800 030 8013. Over-12s can go to drop-in vaccination clinics.In Wales, adults should contact their local health board if they've not been offered their jab. In Northern Ireland, you can book online or call 0300 200 7813. Walk-in centres are open to older teenagers. How soon should I get my second jab?In England, the recommended gap between first and second jabs is between 8-12 weeks. In Wales, the government says you should be called in for your second dose "within 12 weeks" of the first.In Scotland and Northern Ireland the recommended gap is eight weeks.People who are under 40 or pregnant are being offered Pfizer or Moderna rather than Oxford-AstraZeneca, because of a possible connection with extremely rare cases of blood clots.Under-18s are currently being offered Pfizer, although the Moderna vaccine has also been authorised for use in children in the UK.It's not compulsory, although the health secretary has said it's "highly likely" that both Covid and flu jabs will be compulsory for all frontline NHS and care workers in England. Being fully vaccinated will also be a condition of entry for nightclubs and some other events in Scotland from 1 October. It also means you don't have to self-isolate after visiting amber list countries or if a contact tests positive for Covid (as long as you test negative).England's chief midwife has also urged pregnant women to get the vaccine.The most common ones include a sore arm, headache, chills, fatigue and nausea. They are part of the body's normal immune response to vaccines and tend to resolve within a day or two.There are extremely rare but occasionally fatal cases of people developing blood clots after taking the AstraZeneca vaccine. Separately, a very small number of people have experienced a severe allergic reaction after receiving the Pfizer vaccine.You should discuss any existing serious allergies with your healthcare professional before being vaccinated.How many people have been vaccinated so far?Vaccine priority groups - UK government adviceFrance and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pactThe deal caused outrage in France, which lost a contract to build submarines for Australia.Covid could be more like cold by spring - expertWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?How Germans will look back on Angela MerkelImages of Haitians at US border echo grim pastWhy China looks to be on the way back to socialismWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?No-go zones and Russian meddling in Central Africa warThe edible insects coming to a supermarket near youFact-checking President Bolsonaro's UN speechBBC Culture: Striking photos of a lesser-seen IranHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?'Side-eying Chloe', 10, to sell viral meme as NFT1France and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pact2Lithuania urges people to throw away Chinese phones3Three die in dry-ice incident at Moscow pool party4What do we know about Gabby Petito's boyfriend?5Why China looks to be on the way back to socialism6PM: Humanity reaching a turning point on climate7Sabina Nessa killed on short walk to meet friend8Eleven jailed over Morocco gang-rape and torture9Evergrande shares jump as debt deadline looms10© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.