Covid: Should I be working from home or going back to the office?People in England have been told they no longer have to work at home, but there's a warning this could change if there's a Covid surge this winter. Staff in the rest of the UK are still advised to remain at home where possible. What's the advice in England and how might it change?Since Covid restrictions lifted on 19 July, people have no longer been asked to work at home.PM Boris Johnson recommended a "gradual return" for staff who'd worked remotely during the pandemic. But although social distancing limits no longer apply, businesses still have a legal duty to manage risks to staff and customers. Employers must follow official safety guidance and carry out Covid risk assessments. They may keep some previous measures in place, such as minimising visitors, additional cleaning and one-way systems.Regular lateral flow testing remains widespread, and there is more detailed advice for some industries - including construction, hospitality and manufacturing, plus specific advice for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.The government's Covid-19 Autumn and Winter Plan for England includes two proposals.Much of Plan A focuses on the vaccine rollout:But if the NHS struggles, Plan B (or parts of it) could start - including advice to work from home again for "a limited period". Does working from home help stop Covid spreading? Working from home is one of the most effective ways to reduce social contacts, according to the government's Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage). It has a "strong impact" against virus transmission and the R number, which represents a disease's ability to spread.Remote working greatly limits face-to-face contact both with colleagues and on public transport.Chief scientific adviser Sir Patrick Vallance said it could be necessary to reintroduce restrictions if cases start rising fast.What are the rules in the rest of the UK?In Scotland, most Covid restrictions have been lifted, but people are still advised to work from home where possible. The government wants employers to consider long-term "hybrid" models with home and office working.Most Covid restrictions have also been lifted in Wales, but employers are still encouraged to let people work from home where possible. Guidance says staff should not be "required or placed under pressure to return" to the workplace unless there's a clear business need.Northern Ireland's guidance to work from home where possible also remains in place.Can I ask to keep working from home?You can ask as part of a flexible working request, but employers don't have to agree, even if you've worked from home throughout the pandemic. However, the Chartered Institute for Personnel and Development (CIPD) - which represents HR professionals - expects there will be much greater freedom and flexibility in how, when and where people work in future.The CIPD says "it should be down to individual organisations, consulting with their people, to agree working arrangements".The government is expected to launch a consultation shortly on proposals to give all employees the right to request flexible working as soon as they start a job. At the moment, workers have to wait for six months.It's thought employers would also have to respond to requests more quickly than the current maximum of three months, and explain why any requests were refused.How safe is commuting by public transport? Much of the risk depends on how crowded it is and your distance from other people.Wearing a mask helps, as does keeping windows open, and avoiding peak journey times where possible.What are my rights if I am in a vulnerable group?Previous advice that millions of "clinically extremely vulnerable" people should shield, has now ended.Many continue to work from home, but if your job cannot be done remotely, your employer can ask you to return to the workplace. However, they still have a responsibility to keep you safe, so you should raise any specific concerns you have about going back. In addition, if you are disabled, your employer has an extra responsibility to make and pay for "reasonable adjustments".Plan A or Plan B - what could happen this winter?Postcode check: What can you do where you live?France and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pactThe deal caused outrage in France, which lost a contract to build submarines for Australia.Covid could be more like cold by spring - expertWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?How Germans will look back on Angela MerkelImages of Haitians at US border echo grim pastWhy China looks to be on the way back to socialismWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?No-go zones and Russian meddling in Central Africa warThe edible insects coming to a supermarket near youFact-checking President Bolsonaro's UN speechBBC Culture: Striking photos of a lesser-seen IranHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?'Side-eying Chloe', 10, to sell viral meme as NFT1France and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pact2Lithuania urges people to throw away Chinese phones3Three die in dry-ice incident at Moscow pool party4What do we know about Gabby Petito's boyfriend?5Why China looks to be on the way back to socialism6PM: Humanity reaching a turning point on climate7Sabina Nessa killed on short walk to meet friend8Eleven jailed over Morocco gang-rape and torture9Evergrande shares jump as debt deadline looms10© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.