Covid passports: How do I get one and when will I need it?New Covid passport rules will begin in Scotland and Wales in October, restricting who can enter a nightclub or attend large-scale events.Similar plans in England have been scrapped, but will be kept in reserve in case they are needed this winter. What are the Covid passport plans for Scotland?From 1 October, people will need a Covid vaccination certificate to enter nightclubs, adult entertainment venues and large-scale events - although the Night Time Industries Association Scotland, representing nightclubs, is launching a legal challenge against the proposals.The Scottish government says a nightclub is anywhere that meets all of the following criteria:  You can only get the passport if you have been fully vaccinated in Scotland. Proof of a recent negative test will not be enough.Some people will be exempt, including under-18s, people taking part in vaccine trials and those unable to be vaccinated for medical reasons.People can prove they're fully vaccinated by using the NHS Scotland Covid Status App (available from 30 September) to generate a QR code. A paper version is also available.The Scottish government says it's working to ensure the system will also work for people vaccinated in the rest of the UK, or abroad. What are the new rules for Wales?From 11 October, people will be able to use the NHS Covid Pass to show they have been vaccinated.It will also be available to people who have had a negative lateral flow test in the past 48 hours. What happened to Covid passport plans in England?The government decided not to go ahead with vaccine passports, despite saying they would be introduced at the end of September.Setting out the government's winter Covid plans, Health Secretary Sajid Javid said the idea might be reconsidered, if cases surge.The plans had faced opposition from some Tory backbenchers and the Liberal Democrats. Nightclubs said they were "chaotic and surreal". What's happening in  Northern Ireland?Northern Ireland has not yet announced whether it will introduce a similar scheme.How do I prove I've been vaccinated? As long as you're registered with a GP, you can get proof of your Covid-19 status via the NHS App (not the NHS Covid-19 app which alerts you if you've been close to someone with the virus).The app generates an NHS Covid Pass which shows your Covid vaccination details or test results.Over-18s can get an NHS Covid Pass to use in the UK if: Over-16s can get an NHS Covid Pass for foreign travel if:If you don't have a GP, or a mobile device, you can access the pass via the NHS website or by calling 119 to request a letter. The letter only shows your vaccination status (not test results) and has no expiry date.The NHS Covid Pass is available digitally but you need to register for an NHS login. Call 0300 303 5667 for a paper copy at least five days after your final dose.Currently, anyone 16 or over can go online and download a PDF version of their vaccination status showing a unique QR code. From 30 September, the NHS Scotland Covid Status App will be available, at which point the PDF function will be switched off.Printed letter versions for over-12s can be requested via the NHS inform website or by calling 0808 196 8565. You can apply for a Covid status certificate online and use it for travel. France and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pactThe deal caused outrage in France, which lost a contract to build submarines for Australia.Covid could be more like cold by spring - expertWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?How Germans will look back on Angela MerkelImages of Haitians at US border echo grim pastWhy China looks to be on the way back to socialismWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?No-go zones and Russian meddling in Central Africa warThe edible insects coming to a supermarket near youFact-checking President Bolsonaro's UN speechBBC Culture: Striking photos of a lesser-seen IranHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?'Side-eying Chloe', 10, to sell viral meme as NFT1France and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pact2Lithuania urges people to throw away Chinese phones3Three die in dry-ice incident at Moscow pool party4What do we know about Gabby Petito's boyfriend?5Why China looks to be on the way back to socialism6PM: Humanity reaching a turning point on climate7Sabina Nessa killed on short walk to meet friend8Eleven jailed over Morocco gang-rape and torture9Evergrande shares jump as debt deadline looms10© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.