Covid rules: What's in England's 'Winter Plan'?Measures to deal with rising Covid cases in England over the winter have been announced - with a contingency "Plan B" if things get worse.Single vaccines will be offered to children aged 12-15 and booster jabs to over-50s, health workers and the most vulnerable. Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have confirmed they will offer the same. It's called the Covid-19 Response: Autumn and Winter Plan. Covid booster jabs will be offered to around 30 million people, including the over-50s, younger adults with health conditions and frontline health and social care workers.Health Secretary Sajid Javid said Plan A would also include offering vaccines to youngsters aged 12-15 and continuing to encourage unvaccinated people to get jabbed.If Plan A is not sufficient to prevent "unsustainable pressure" on the NHS, the government says Plan B will be required "as a last resort" - including: Plan B could be brought in at short notice as a response to "concerning" data. Government scientific advisers haven't said exactly what this data would be, but say it's important to keep an eye on: Prime Minister Boris Johnson said parts of Plan B could be introduced gradually, rather than all at once. What are the current rules in England?Businesses such as nightclubs are encouraged to use the NHS Covid Pass to check people are fully vaccinated. People who have been working from home are being encouraged to return to the workplace gradually.What is the situation in Scotland?From 1 October, all over-18s will be required to prove their vaccine status at nightclubs and other venues. What are the restrictions in Northern Ireland?Covid rules ease on dining, dancing and live showsWhat restrictions are still in place in Wales?Wales' First Minister Mark Drakeford has said he could be persuaded of the need for vaccine passports. His government is due to decide this week.France and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pactThe deal caused outrage in France, which lost a contract to build submarines for Australia.Covid could be more like cold by spring - expertWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?How Germans will look back on Angela MerkelImages of Haitians at US border echo grim pastWhy China looks to be on the way back to socialismWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?No-go zones and Russian meddling in Central Africa warThe edible insects coming to a supermarket near youFact-checking President Bolsonaro's UN speechBBC Culture: Striking photos of a lesser-seen IranHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?'Side-eying Chloe', 10, to sell viral meme as NFT1France and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pact2Lithuania urges people to throw away Chinese phones3Three die in dry-ice incident at Moscow pool party4What do we know about Gabby Petito's boyfriend?5Why China looks to be on the way back to socialism6PM: Humanity reaching a turning point on climate7Sabina Nessa killed on short walk to meet friend8Eleven jailed over Morocco gang-rape and torture9Evergrande shares jump as debt deadline looms10© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.