Newspaper headlines: 'Winter of woe' and France rift deepens"Britain faces winter of woe" is the headline on the front page of the Daily Mail, as it suggests millions will be hit by what it calls a "£400 fuel bill shock".The Daily Mirror says the crisis will "burn through our cash" as further suppliers collapse - and compensation costs for takeovers are passed on to the consumer.The Times warns it is unlikely that high prices will come down again for at least two years, while the Guardian claims ministers are considering a "windfall tax" on the companies profiting from the record hikes. The Daily Express devotes its front page to a call from campaigners to raise winter fuel payments in response to the crisis. "Le bust-up" is the Daily Mail's franglais headline on its coverage of the diplomatic tensions between London and Paris over the Aukus security pact. The paper says Boris Johnson has likened President Macron to a "jilted lover".Several front pages carry a picture of the prime minister next to a bust of Sir Winston Churchill in the US Capitol on his visit to Washington. The caption? His message to France: "Donnez-Moi un break" - give me a break.Mr Johnson's intervention on the issue of face-to-face doctor appointments makes the front pages of the the Daily Telegraph. The paper says the PM insisted that patients must be able to see a GP in person - putting him at loggerheads with the leaders of family doctors, who have rejected calls for such a right for patients to be officially recognised. The Financial Times reports that partners at the professional services giant, Deloitte, are to receive an average individual payout of £1m - the highest in a decade. The paper says the payment has been approved after the Big Four firm's profits rebounded from a pandemic slump."Starmer lays down roadmap to the centre" is the Guardian's take on the essay published by the Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer. The paper says party leftwingers are likely to see the document as a shift away from the Corbyn era's radical spending promises. According to the Guardian columnist Owen Jones, the plan is an "anti-democratic outrage - motivated by a fear of the left".Online, the Independent suggests that Sir Keir's "gamble" in trying to change the party's leadership rules risks a blow to his authority, as the unions refuse to back him. Sign up for a morning briefing direct to your inboxThe former Labour Prime Minister Gordon Brown launches a stinging attack on government plans to remove the extra £20 a week which was added to Universal Credit during the height of the pandemic. Writing in the Guardian, Mr Brown - who's now an ambassador for the World Health Organization - said there was never a right moment to cut benefits, but at a time when food and energy prices were rocketing, it was the most morally indefensible thing he'd seen in politics.And the Times publishes research which suggests that there could be a genuine medical reason why your children won't eat their greens. "Won't eat sprouts ? Blame their mouth bacteria " is the headline.Scientists who studied nearly a hundred children found that the saliva of some, had higher enzyme activity - making them far more likely to dislike the brassica group of vegetables.The lead researcher Damian Frank has good news for parents everywhere though: he said the study raised the possibility of being able to nurture a liking of the veg - by altering the microbes in the mouth.The BBC News Channel’s press review every evening at 22:40 weekdays, 22:30 and 23:30 weekends and via the BBC iPlayer© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.