Universal credit: When will the £20 increase stop?The end of the £20-a-week boost to universal credit could mean many UK households face a "very difficult winter", Business Secretary Kwasi Kwarteng told the BBC. The increase is due to end in October, despite appeals from many MPs to make it permanent.How is universal credit changing?In response to the pandemic, a temporary £20 increase to universal credit payments was introduced.The scheme officially ends on 6 October.However, the exact date the money will stop being paid will vary depending on the day you usually receive universal credit. For some people, this will mean the last payment at the higher rate will be at the end of September.The government argues that as the economy opens up, the focus needs to shift to getting people back to work. What has the business secretary said?Kwasi Kwarteng told BBC Breakfast that the combination of rising energy prices and the change to Universal Credit was "a difficult situation" which could mean a "very difficult winter" for many.He said the government had spent a "huge" amount of money during the pandemic to provide "massive support" to the economy and workers, but that "there was a debate about how long we could afford this." He said he was speaking "a great deal about it" to the chancellor and other ministers, as part of his focus on tackling fuel poverty. Universal credit is claimed by more than 5.8 million people in England, Scotland and Wales.Almost 40% of them are classed as being in employment.The charity Citizens Advice has warned that a third of people on Universal Credit will end up in debt when the extra payment is removed.It said the average shortfall would be between £51 and £55 a month.Another charity, the Health Foundation, has warned that the cut could lead to poorer mental health and wellbeing for thousands of families.Universal credit is a benefit for working-age people, which was introduced to replace six benefits and merge them into one payment. The replaced benefits are:Most people who would have made a new claim for these individual benefits now make one for universal credit. It was designed to make claiming benefits simpler.A single universal credit payment is paid directly into claimants' bank accounts. This happens monthly in England and Wales, but there is the option of payment every two weeks in Scotland and Northern Ireland.It can be claimed whether you are in or out of work. Universal credit may not be appropriate or available for everyone. Claiming it can affect other benefits, and it is vital to get some advice - available for free - before applying.What are the concerns about universal credit?It is complicated to work out exactly how much universal credit you might receive. Some people, such as those with £16,000 or more in savings, are not eligible.Others may find what they receive depends on their circumstances, including any income their family has, as well as housing and childcare costs.It usually takes five weeks from the date of claiming to receiving a first payment, although an advance loan may be possible.An application for universal credit may put a stop to any tax credits you receive, even if it proves to be unsuccessful.You may be able to claim a reduction in council tax when on universal credit, and get help with childcare costs. There is also support to pay the rent, which works in different ways across the UK. In time, there may also be assistance in paying the mortgage, although there are some strict criteria involved.What other benefits are still available?The main benefit for anyone losing their job after a period in work is new-style jobseeker's allowance (JSA).This is worth £59.20 a week, if you are under 25, or £74.70 a week if you are 25 or over.You can get this for up to six months and it will be paid into your bank, building society, or credit union account every two weeks. Unlike universal credit, your partner's or spouse's income will not affect your claim.You may be able to claim new-style JSA as well as universal credit.There is free guidance and advice available, including: What's happening with the people still on furlough?How many people could lose their jobs?'There is help out there if you ask for it'Why some people on universal credit struggle to budget monthly'One click and I was worse off' from benefit claimFrance and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pactThe deal caused outrage in France, which lost a contract to build submarines for Australia.Covid could be more like cold by spring - expertWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?How Germans will look back on Angela MerkelImages of Haitians at US border echo grim pastWhy China looks to be on the way back to socialismWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?No-go zones and Russian meddling in Central Africa warThe edible insects coming to a supermarket near youFact-checking President Bolsonaro's UN speechBBC Culture: Striking photos of a lesser-seen IranHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?'Side-eying Chloe', 10, to sell viral meme as NFT1France and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pact2Lithuania urges people to throw away Chinese phones3Three die in dry-ice incident at Moscow pool party4What do we know about Gabby Petito's boyfriend?5Why China looks to be on the way back to socialism6PM: Humanity reaching a turning point on climate7Sabina Nessa killed on short walk to meet friend8Eleven jailed over Morocco gang-rape and torture9Evergrande shares jump as debt deadline looms10© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.