What are the travel rules for Spain, Portugal, Malta and other holiday hotspots?An overhaul of England's traffic light system for foreign travel has been announced.Green and amber countries will be merged into one list from 4 October and there will be fewer Covid tests for fully vaccinated travellers.But destinations still have their own rules - when you arrive and at your hotel, villa or campsite. These can change quickly, so it's important to check the Foreign Office guidance and tourist information for your destination.Some of the key rules in place in seven destinations popular with UK holidaymakers are below. Mainland Portugal entry requirementsMainland Portugal does not yet accept the NHS Covid pass as proof of vaccination. Anyone travelling to the country aged 12 or over must: Children aged 11 and under do not need to take a test.UK Foreign Office travel advice for PortugalThe NHS Covid pass is not yet accepted as proof of vaccination. Anyone aged 13 or over travelling to the Azores must:Check the regional tourist office website for information.Anyone aged 12 or over travelling to Madeira must complete and submit a traveller questionnaire.You must also do one of the following:The NHS Covid Pass (England and Wales) can be used as evidence of vaccination status.If you live in Scotland you can download a QR code or request an NHS letter. There is a similar Covid certificate for Northern Ireland residents.Expect to be health screened on arrival. You will be asked to show your proof of vaccination or negative test result.Check Madeira's official tourist website for more information.A number of restrictions are in place:UK Foreign Office travel advice for PortugalThe Visit Portugal website has more information - as do the official wesbites for Madeira/information-to-visitors-(covid-19)) and the Azores.Return to UK
                        The red, amber and green traffic light system is being scrapped in England.Transport Secretary Grant Shapps says there will be a new "simplified system" for international travel - with a single red list. The system will stay in place until at least the new year.If you are fully vaccinated, you won’t need a pre-departure Covid test before arrival into England from a non-red country. You will still need to take a PCR test on day two of your return, but from "later" in October it is hoped you will be able to take a cheaper lateral flow test. The government is aiming to have this in place for when people return from half-term breaks.
                        
                        Passengers who aren’t fully vaccinated will still have to take a pre-departure test, a day two and day eight PCR test - and self-isolate for 10 days - upon their return from a non-red list country, including Portugal. Test to Release will remain an option for unvaccinated passengers who wish to shorten their isolation period.Whatever your Covid status, you will still need to fill out a passenger locator form for England.Mainland Portugal is on the amber travel list. Check the rules for returning home to England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.Adults entering the UK from an amber-list country no longer have to quarantine, if they have been fully vaccinated by the NHS. Adults entering from the EU or the US do not have to quarantine if they have received a full EMA or FDA-recognised vaccination.The quarantine requirement has also been lifted for all under-18s.UK passengers will have to prove their vaccination status with either the NHS Covid Pass in England or Wales, an NHS QR code or letter in Scotland, or Covid certificate in Northern Ireland.Everyone aged 11 or over will still have to take a private test within three days before returning, and two days after return (12s and over in Scotland). Children aged 5-10 will also need to test on day two of return.If you return from an amber list country and are not fully vaccinated (and are aged 18+) you will need to quarantine at home for 10 days and take an extra PCR test eight days after you get back.The Azores and Madeira are green list destinations (although Madeira is currently on the green watchlist, which means it may return to amber at short notice). You will not have to quarantine on your return, but you must pay for tests before your departure for the UK and two days after your return.Everyone aged 12 or over arriving in Spain from the UK must present either:The NHS Covid Pass can be used as evidence of vaccination status if you are travelling from England or Wales. If you live in Scotland you can download a QR code or request an NHS letter. There is a similar Covid certificate for Northern Ireland residents.In addition, you must complete a health control form no more than 48 hours before travelling to Spain by air or sea.A negative Covid test (PCR or lateral flow), proof of vaccination or proof of Covid-recovery may be required to cross the French border into Spain.The French government changed requirements for those transiting through France. If you are planning to drive to Spain, check the latest FCDO travel advice for France.If travelling via Gibraltar, check the latest Foreign Office travel advice.Across Spain, you need to observe the following rules:Spanish regions may impose their own local restrictions, such as overnight curfews, limits on gatherings or on the number of people allowed at beaches or other public areas. You should check with local and regional authorities for advice.The Foreign Office has specific healthcare guidance for UK nationals visiting Spain.Tourist accommodation in the Canary Islands (and some other parts of Spain) requires proof of either full vaccination, a negative test or recent recovery from Covid.UK Foreign Office travel advice for SpainThe red, amber and green traffic light system is being scrapped in England.Transport Secretary Grant Shapps says there will be a new "simplified system" for international travel - with a single red list. The system will stay in place until at least the new year.If you are fully vaccinated, you won’t need a pre-departure Covid test before arrival into England from a non-red country. You will still need to take a PCR test on day two of your return, but from "later" in October it is hoped you will be able to take a cheaper lateral flow test. The government is aiming to have this in place for when people return from half-term breaks.
                        
                        Passengers who aren’t fully vaccinated will still have to take a pre-departure test, a day two and day eight PCR test - and self-isolate for 10 days - upon their return from a non-red list country, including Spain. Test to Release will remain an option for unvaccinated passengers who wish to shorten their isolation period.Whatever your Covid status, you will still need to fill out a passenger locator form for England.Spain (including the Balearic Islands and Canary Islands) is on the amber travel list. Check the rules for returning home to England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.Adults entering the UK from an amber-list country no longer have to quarantine, if they have been fully vaccinated by the NHS. Adults entering from the EU or the US do not have to quarantine if they have received a full EMA or FDA-recognised vaccination.The quarantine requirement has also been lifted for all under-18s.UK passengers will have to prove their vaccination status with either the NHS Covid Pass in England or Wales, an NHS QR code or letter in Scotland, or Covid certificate in Northern Ireland.Everyone aged 11 or over will still have to take a private test within three days before returning - the UK government says this should preferably be a PCR test. Another test is required two days after return for anyone aged 11 and over (12 and over in Scotland). Children aged 5-10 will also need to test on day two of return.If you return from an amber list country and are not fully vaccinated (and are aged 18+) you will need to quarantine at home for 10 days and take an extra PCR test eight days after you get back.Only fully vaccinated adults can travel to Malta from the UK.Children aged 5-11 can travel with fully-vaccinated adults, but must show evidence of a negative PCR test carried out within 72 hours before arrival. Under-fives do not need a test.Children aged 12-17 will only be able to enter Malta if they are fully vaccinated. However, the UK is not currently vaccinating most children under the age of 16.The NHS Covid Pass can be used as evidence of vaccination status if you are travelling from England or Wales. If you live in Scotland you can download a QR code or request an NHS letter. There is a similar Covid certificate for Northern Ireland residents.Adults are not required to take a PCR test.You must complete a passenger locator and public health declaration form before you travel, and show it to officials both on departure from the UK and arrival in Malta.Two people together, with proof of vaccination, can remove their masks in an outdoor public place.UK Foreign Office travel advice for MaltaReturn to UK
                        The red, amber and green traffic light system is being scrapped in England.Transport Secretary Grant Shapps says there will be a new "simplified system" for international travel - with a single red list. The system will stay in place until at least the new year.If you are fully vaccinated, you won’t need a pre-departure Covid test before arrival into England from a non-red country. You will still need to take a PCR test on day two of your return, but from "later" in October it is hoped you will be able to take a cheaper lateral flow test. The government is aiming to have this in place for when people return from half-term breaks.
                        
                        Passengers who aren’t fully vaccinated will still have to take a pre-departure test, a day two and day eight PCR test - and self-isolate for 10 days - upon their return from a non-red list country, including Malta. Test to Release will remain an option for unvaccinated passengers who wish to shorten their isolation period.Whatever your Covid status, you will still need to fill out a passenger locator form for England.You do not need to quarantine on your return to the UK but you must:You must complete a passenger locator form before travelling, which will give you a QR code.Everyone aged 12 or over must also provide one of the following: If you're travelling from England or Wales, you can show the NHS Covid Pass as evidence of vaccination status. If you live in Scotland you can download a QR code or request an NHS letter. There is a similar Covid certificate for Northern Ireland residents.You may have to take a rapid Covid test on arrival in Greece, with quarantine in a hotel for at least 10 days if positive.You may also have to self-isolate if other passengers on your flight or ferry test positive.You must wear a face mask in all indoor public and communal spaces, including work-places and on public transport.Travel to and between most Greek islands requires either:The islands of Lefkada, Evia and Salamina are the only exceptions to this rule.Some restrictions vary from region to region - you may need to check local guidance.UK Foreign Office travel advice for GreeceThe red, amber and green traffic light system is being scrapped in England.Transport Secretary Grant Shapps says there will be a new "simplified system" for international travel - with a single red list. The system will stay in place until at least the new year.If you are fully vaccinated, you won’t need a pre-departure Covid test before arrival into England from a non-red country. You will still need to take a PCR test on day two of your return, but from "later" in October it is hoped you will be able to take a cheaper lateral flow test. The government is aiming to have this in place for when people return from half-term breaks.
                        
                        Passengers who aren’t fully vaccinated will still have to take a pre-departure test, a day two and day eight PCR test - and self-isolate for 10 days - upon their return from a non-red list country, including Greece. Test to Release will remain an option for unvaccinated passengers who wish to shorten their isolation period.Whatever your Covid status, you will still need to fill out a passenger locator form for England.Greece is on the amber travel list. Check the rules for returning home to England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.Adults entering the UK from an amber-list country no longer have to quarantine, if they have been fully vaccinated by the NHS. Adults entering from the EU or the US do not have to quarantine if they have received a full EMA or FDA-recognised vaccination.The quarantine requirement has also been lifted for all under-18s.UK passengers will have to prove their vaccination status with either the NHS Covid Pass in England or Wales, an NHS QR code or letter in Scotland, or Covid certificate in Northern Ireland.Everyone aged 11 or over will still have to take a private test within three days before returning, and two days after return (12s and over in Scotland). Children aged 5-10 will also need to test on day two of return.If you return from an amber list country and are not fully vaccinated (and are aged 18+) you will need to quarantine at home for 10 days and take an extra PCR test eight days after you get back.Travellers from the UK must complete an online digital form, which will generate a QR code. You may be asked to present this before travel or by the border police. A paper form can also be completed if you do not have an electronic device.Italian airport regulations require all travellers to wear a medical mask on board flights to and from Italy. You should check airline rules.There is no need to quarantine if you can prove you are fully vaccinated and present a negative PCR or antigen (lateral flow) test result, taken within 48 hours before entering Italy.The NHS Covid Pass (England and Wales) will be accepted as proof of vaccination. If you live in Scotland you can download a QR code or request an NHS letter. There is a similar Covid certificate for Northern Ireland residents.Unvaccinated under-18s are exempt from quarantine if they travel with a fully vaccinated adult and have a negative test. Children aged five or under are exempt from testing.Unvaccinated travellers, or those arriving without proof of vaccination and a negative test, will be required to self-isolate for five days. You will need to contact the regional health office to tell them where you will be self-isolating. You must travel to your final destination by private only and also take a test at the end of the five-day period. The Italian embassy in London has more information - or you can consult the Italian Government’s online questionnaire (both in English).A “green pass”, also known as an EU Digital COVID Certificate, is needed to access many public spaces - these include indoor seating in bars and restaurants, shared hotel facilities, museums, exhibitions, swimming pools, fairs and large events. The pass is also required to travel on most public transport between regions. A UK vaccination record (the NHS Covid Pass or equivalent in Northern Ireland and Scotland) will be accepted as a green pass but it must be in the form of a digital QR code. You can also obtain a 48-hour green pass if you can test negative to a rapid Covid test at a local pharmacy. Children under 12 are exempt from presenting a green pass (except for travel).Many restrictions have now been relaxed but the following are still in place:UK Foreign Office travel advice for ItalyItaly's official tourism websiteThe red, amber and green traffic light system is being scrapped in England.Transport Secretary Grant Shapps says there will be a new "simplified system" for international travel - with a single red list. The system will stay in place until at least the new year.If you are fully vaccinated, you won’t need a pre-departure Covid test before arrival into England from a non-red country. You will still need to take a PCR test on day two of your return, but from "later" in October it is hoped you will be able to take a cheaper lateral flow test. The government is aiming to have this in place for when people return from half-term breaks.
                        
                        Passengers who aren’t fully vaccinated will still have to take a pre-departure test, a day two and day eight PCR test - and self-isolate for 10 days - upon their return from a non-red list country, including Italy. Test to Release will remain an option for unvaccinated passengers who wish to shorten their isolation period.Whatever your Covid status, you will still need to fill out a passenger locator form for England.Italy is on the amber travel list. Check the rules for returning home to England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.Adults entering the UK from an amber-list country no longer have to quarantine, if they have been fully vaccinated by the NHS. Adults entering from the EU or the US do not have to quarantine if they have received a full EMA or FDA-recognised vaccination.The quarantine requirement has also been lifted for all under-18s.UK passengers will have to prove their vaccination status with either the NHS Covid Pass in England or Wales, an NHS QR code or letter in Scotland, or Covid certificate in Northern Ireland.Everyone aged 11 or over will still have to take a private test within three days before returning, and two days after return (12s and over in Scotland). Children aged 5-10 will also need to test on day two of return.If you return from an amber list country and are not fully vaccinated (and are aged 18+) you will need to quarantine at home for 10 days and take an extra PCR test eight days after you get back.If you are fully vaccinated you can enter France from the UK as long as you:Fully vaccinated adult travellers don't have to provide proof of a negative PCR/antigen test result - but children aged 12 or over travelling with them do.If you're travelling from England or Wales, you can show the NHS Covid Pass as evidence of vaccination status. If you live in Scotland you can download a QR code or request an NHS letter. There is a similar Covid certificate for Northern Ireland residents.                                                                                If you are not fully vaccinated, you will only be allowed entry for essential reasons. Over-12s will need to present a negative PCR or antigen test taken less than 24 hours before departure. Self-administered tests are not accepted. You must complete a certificate of international travel and agree to seven days' isolation.Face masks are required in all enclosed public spaces. No requirement to wear a mask in outdoor public spaces, with some exceptions (gatherings, queues, markets, stadiums).Children under 11 not required to wear masks.Adults (and 12-17 year olds from October) need a "pass sanitaire" to attend larger events and for entry to a wide range of venues including bars, restaurants, museums, or to use some types of public transport including planes and long-distance trains.To obtain a pass sanitaire you will need either:You can demonstrate your vaccination status by presenting the QR code from the relevant NHS portal (England, Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland) or by using the downloadable PDF certificate. You can also choose to scan and save your NHS QR code into France’s “TousAntiCovid” app.If fully vaccinated, you can also request a QR code for domestic use in France from the French government. You must provide details of the following by email - vaccination certificate, valid passport, return travel tickets, completed application form.UK Foreign Office travel advice for FranceThe red, amber and green traffic light system is being scrapped in England.Transport Secretary Grant Shapps says there will be a new "simplified system" for international travel - with a single red list. The system will stay in place until at least the new year.If you are fully vaccinated, you won’t need a pre-departure Covid test before arrival into England from a non-red country. You will still need to take a PCR test on day two of your return, but from "later" in October it is hoped you will be able to take a cheaper lateral flow test. The government is aiming to have this in place for when people return from half-term breaks.
                        
                        Passengers who aren’t fully vaccinated will still have to take a pre-departure test, a day two and day eight PCR test - and self-isolate for 10 days - upon their return from a non-red list country, including France. Test to Release will remain an option for unvaccinated passengers who wish to shorten their isolation period.Whatever your Covid status, you will still need to fill out a passenger locator form for England.France is on the amber travel list. Check the rules for returning home to England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.Adults entering the UK from an amber-list country no longer have to quarantine, if they have been fully vaccinated by the NHS. Adults entering from the EU or the US do not have to quarantine if they have received a full EMA or FDA-recognised vaccination.The quarantine requirement has also been lifted for all under-18s.UK passengers will have to prove their vaccination status with either the NHS Covid Pass in England or Wales, an NHS QR code or letter in Scotland, or Covid certificate in Northern Ireland.Everyone aged 11 or over will still have to take a private test within three days before returning, and two days after return (12s and over in Scotland). Children aged 5-10 will also need to test on day two of return.If you return from an amber list country and are not fully vaccinated (and are aged 18+) you will need to quarantine at home for 10 days and take an extra PCR test eight days after you get back.The French islands of La Reunion and Mayotte are on the red list.Turkey is on the UK's red list of countries - but will come off it on 22 September. While Turkey is on the red list, most normal holiday insurance policies are likely to be invalid. Provinces are split into four tiers - low to very high - according to Covid-19 risk.UK Foreign Office travel advice for TurkeyTurkey is on England's red travel list until 04:00 BST on 22 September. Until then, follow the red rules when you return. From them, Turkey will be on England's amber list of countries.While Turkey is on the red list, you will have to pay for 10-days' self-isolation in a hotel and take two further Covid tests. From 22 September you should follow the amber rules.Direct flights from Turkey to England have resumed to designated terminals at Heathrow and Birmingham.The red, amber and green traffic light system is being scrapped in England.Transport Secretary Grant Shapps says there will be a new "simplified system" for international travel - with a single red list. The system will stay in place until at least the new year.Whatever your Covid status, you will still need to fill out a passenger locator form for England.If you are fully vaccinated, you won’t need a pre-departure Covid test before arrival into England from a non-red country. You will still need to take a PCR test on day two of your return, but from "later" in October it is hoped you will be able to take a cheaper lateral flow test. The government is aiming to have this in place for when people return from half-term breaks.
                        
                        Passengers who aren’t fully vaccinated will still have to take a pre-departure test, a day two and day eight PCR test - and self-isolate for 10 days - upon their return from a non-red list country, including Turkey. Test to Release will remain an option for unvaccinated passengers who wish to shorten their isolation period.You might also find looking at this table useful - showing Covid case numbers and vaccine doses by country.When comparing figures from different countries it is important to bear in mind that not all governments are recording coronavirus cases and deaths in the same way. You should also consider the population size of each nation.Your device may not support this visualisationFrance and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pactThe deal caused outrage in France, which lost a contract to build submarines for Australia.Covid could be more like cold by spring - expertWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?How Germans will look back on Angela MerkelImages of Haitians at US border echo grim pastWhy China looks to be on the way back to socialismWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?No-go zones and Russian meddling in Central Africa warThe edible insects coming to a supermarket near youFact-checking President Bolsonaro's UN speechBBC Culture: Striking photos of a lesser-seen IranHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?'Side-eying Chloe', 10, to sell viral meme as NFT1France and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pact2Lithuania urges people to throw away Chinese phones3Three die in dry-ice incident at Moscow pool party4What do we know about Gabby Petito's boyfriend?5Why China looks to be on the way back to socialism6PM: Humanity reaching a turning point on climate7Sabina Nessa killed on short walk to meet friend8Eleven jailed over Morocco gang-rape and torture9Evergrande shares jump as debt deadline looms10© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.