What can I do if my energy supplier goes bust?Almost 1.5 million customers have seen their energy firm collapse as a result of soaring gas prices.What are your rights if this happens to you?Which energy suppliers are going bust?Seven energy suppliers - Hub, Money Plus, Utility Point, People's Energy, PFP, Green and Avro - have been forced out of business, affecting almost 1.5m customers.There are fears more firms could follow.Bulb, which has 1.7 million customers, is trying to bolster its finances. Another firm, Igloo, has said it's working with restructuring consultants but told the BBC it hadn't yet appointed administrators.Business Secretary Kwasi Kwarteng is having daily calls with the energy regulator Ofgem to monitor the situation.What happens if my supplier collapses?If your energy provider goes bust, you won't stop receiving gas and electricity. Your account will be moved to a new supplier by energy regulator Ofgem - although this may take a few weeks. Unfortunately, you may end up on a more expensive tariff with a new supplier.It's not yet clear which firm will take on the 580,000 customers from Avro Energy, the biggest firm to fail so far. Regulator Ofgem hasn't appointed a new provider for Green's 250,000 customers either.Citizens Advice recommends making a note or taking a photo of your meter reading as soon as possible, and downloading any bills, while waiting for your new supplier to contact you.There's no need to cancel direct debits straight away. You should wait for your new account to be set up before cancelling existing arrangements.If you're in credit with your old supplier, your money is protected and you'll be paid back. If you're in debt, you'll still have to pay the money you owe. Will I still be able to find a cheap deal?This is unlikely at the moment. Price comparison site Compare The Market has paused its energy switching service, while other similar sites are offering far fewer deals than usual. Citizens Advice has a useful guide to choosing the right tariff.If your supplier goes bust, it says you should wait until Ofgem switches you to a new tariff before looking for a better deal - otherwise you may find it harder to reclaim any money you're owed.Ofgem also sets out the steps you should take to switch energy supplier and shop for a better deal. About 15 million households in England, Wales and Scotland were already facing a 12% rise in their energy bills from October, when a higher energy cap is due to come into force. The energy cap was introduced in January 2019 and sets the maximum price suppliers can charge customers on a standard - or default - tariff. In Northern Ireland, a separate market with two suppliers, prices will also rise next month by 21.8% (SSE) and 35% (firmus).A worldwide squeeze on gas and energy supplies has meant gas prices in the UK, Europe and Asia have risen 250% since January. Supplies of renewable energy in Great Britain are also down because it's been the least windy summer since 1961. A recent fire at a National Grid site in Kent also closed a power cable supplying electricity from France. Rising gas prices have also led to a shortage of carbon dioxide (CO2), which is widely used in the food and drink industry.US-owned CF Industries recently shut two UK sites that produce 60% of the country's commercial CO2 supplies. After warnings from food producers and supermarkets that a continuing CO2 shortage would cause significant disruption to the supply of fresh produce, the government agreed to pay tens of millions of pounds to CF Industries to reopen its Teeside plant. How have you been affected by issues raised in this article? You can share your experience by emailing haveyoursay@bbc.co.uk.Please include a contact number if you are willing to speak to a BBC journalist. You can also get in touch in the following ways:If you are reading this page and can't see the form you will need to visit the mobile version of the BBC website to submit your question or comment or you can email us at HaveYourSay@bbc.co.uk. Please include your name, age and location with any submission. Why are gas prices high and what's the energy price cap?Is the UK headed for a gas shortage this winter?France and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pactThe deal caused outrage in France, which lost a contract to build submarines for Australia.Covid could be more like cold by spring - expertWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?How Germans will look back on Angela MerkelImages of Haitians at US border echo grim pastWhy China looks to be on the way back to socialismWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel? VideoWhat will Germans miss about Angela Merkel?No-go zones and Russian meddling in Central Africa warThe edible insects coming to a supermarket near youFact-checking President Bolsonaro's UN speechBBC Culture: Striking photos of a lesser-seen IranHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?'Side-eying Chloe', 10, to sell viral meme as NFT1France and US seek to mend rift over Aukus pact2Lithuania urges people to throw away Chinese phones3Three die in dry-ice incident at Moscow pool party4What do we know about Gabby Petito's boyfriend?5Why China looks to be on the way back to socialism6PM: Humanity reaching a turning point on climate7Sabina Nessa killed on short walk to meet friend8Eleven jailed over Morocco gang-rape and torture9Evergrande shares jump as debt deadline looms10© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.