COP26: What is the Glasgow climate conference and why is it important?The UK is hosting a summit that is seen as crucial if climate change is to be brought under control.The meeting in Glasgow from 31 October to 12 November could lead to major changes to our everyday lives.What is COP26 and why is it happening?The world is warming because of fossil fuel emissions caused by humans. Extreme weather events linked to climate change - including heatwaves, floods and forest fires - are intensifying. The past decade was the warmest on record,  and governments agree urgent collective action is needed.For this conference, 200 countries are being asked for their plans to cut emissions by 2030. They all agreed in 2015 to make changes to keep global warming "well below" 2C above pre-industrial levels - and to try aim for 1.5C - so that we avoid a climate catastrophe.This is what's known as the Paris Agreement, and it means countries have to keep making bigger emissions cuts until reaching net zero in 2050.Most countries will set out their plans to reduce emissions before the summit starts - so, we should get a sense of whether we are on track beforehand.But during the two weeks we can expect a flurry of new announcements. Many are expected to be very technical - including rules still needed to implement the Paris Agreement, for example.But some other announcements could include:Up to 25,000 people are expected in Glasgow, including world leaders, negotiators and journalists. Tens of thousands of campaigners and businesses will also be there to hold events, network - and hold protests. Extinction Rebellion, for example, are calling for an immediate end to the use of fossil fuels.At the end of the conference, some form of declaration is expected.Every country will be required to sign up and it could include specific commitments.Are there likely sticking points?Expect a lot of talk about money and climate justice. Developing countries tend to pollute less per head of population and are not responsible for most emissions in the past.But they experience some of the worst effects of climate change.They need money to help reduce their emissions and to cope with climate change. It could mean more solar panels in countries that depend on energy from coal and flood defence systems. There will also be a battle over compensation for developing countries affected by climate change. Wealthy countries previously pledged $100bn (£720m) a year to help poorer nations by 2020. A UN assessment last year said the target was likely to be missed, so richer countries are being asked to commit more money. China's commitments at COP26 will also be very important. It is now the world's biggest polluter and has investments in coal stations all over the world. Many observers will be watching how quickly China - and other major fossil fuel producers - will be willing to reduce their reliance on them.Some commitments made in Glasgow could directly affect our daily lives. For example, it could change whether you drive a petrol car, heat your home with a gas boiler, or take as many flights.How will we know COP26 is a success?As host nation, the UK will likely want all countries to back a strong statement that recommits to net zero emissions by 2050 - as well as big reductions by 2030.It will also want specific pledges on ending coal, petrol cars and protecting nature. Developing countries will want a significant financial package over the next five years, to help them adapt to rising temperatures. Anything short of this is likely to be judged inadequate because there simply isn't more time to keep the 1.5C goal alive.However, some scientists believe world leaders have left it too late and no matter what is agreed at COP26, 1.5C will not be achieved.Top image from Getty Images. Climate stripes visualisation courtesy of Prof Ed Hawkins and University of Reading.Do you have any questions about the forthcoming COP26 global climate conference in Glasgow?In some cases your question will be published, displaying your name, age and location as you provide it, unless you state otherwise. Your contact details will never be published. Please ensure you have read our terms & conditions and privacy policy.Use this form to ask your question: If you are reading this page and can't see the form you will need to visit the mobile version of the BBC website to submit your question or send them via email to YourQuestions@bbc.co.uk. Please include your name, age and location with any question you send in. Polish PM accuses EU of blackmail in law rowMateusz Morawiecki clashes with EU leaders over a Polish court ruling that rejected parts of EU law.Taliban urged to lift ban on girls' education. VideoTaliban urged to lift ban on girls' educationDiver finds crusader sword off Israel's coastThe shortages hitting countries around the worldFar-right journalist poses new threat to Macron'Why is PM Modi's photo on my vaccine certificate?'Flying Doctors take vaccines to Australia's outback. VideoFlying Doctors take vaccines to Australia's outbackWhen Britain went to the 'Iron Curtain Olympics'The battle to make lighter life-saving body armourColin Powell: Vietnam vet to secretary of stateI get abuse and threats online - why can't it be stopped?BBC Future: The race to save New York's shipwrecksHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?1Polish PM accuses EU of blackmail in law row2New Delta Covid mutant under close watch in UK3US football coach fired for refusing vaccine4Why are UK Covid cases so high?5Diver finds crusader sword off Israel's coast6The shortages hitting countries around the world7Fears grow for girl missing from Australia campsite8Kanye West officially changes his name to Ye9Russia bans male 'extremist' group for online hate10North Korea fires missile into waters off Japan© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.