Southeastern and Avanti West Coast trains severely disruptedRail passengers have been warned of severe disruption across parts of London and the south east of England.Urgent repairs to a track in south-east London have led to delays and cancellations to Southeastern trains in and out of Charing Cross.Some services have been diverted to London Victoria.Trains to and from Euston are also facing disruption after a woman was hit by a train in north-west London. She has been taken to hospital.Southeastern said the number of trains running to and from Charing Cross would be "severely restricted" all day. Full details are available on the company's website. Services were suspended at Euston while emergency services treated the woman, who was injured at Headstone Lane station, Harrow. The incident is not being treated as suspicious, police said.⚠️Due to emergency services dealing with an incident, the line between London Euston and Watford Junction is currently blocked. Please keep up to date with live information here - https://t.co/wxjls1NHVQAvanti West Coast said lines had reopened but services may be cancelled or delayed throughout the afternoon. Network Rail tweeted that a set of points had cracked in the New Cross area. "We have engineers on site and they will be able to fix most of the problem this afternoon, but will need to go back in overnight to complete the job, when trains aren't running and we cause the least disruption," the company said. ⚠️ We’re really sorry to @Se_Railway passengers experiencing severe delays into Charing Cross because of a cracked set of points, the kit which helps trains switch tracks. pic.twitter.com/AWHGAChysoThameslink said it expected its services between Rainham and Luton to be busier than usual due to the Southeastern disruption.Rail operator taken over by governmentRail services increase as passengers returnPolish PM accuses EU of blackmail in law rowMateusz Morawiecki clashes with EU leaders over a Polish court ruling that rejected parts of EU law.Taliban urged to lift ban on girls' education. VideoTaliban urged to lift ban on girls' educationDiver finds crusader sword off Israel's coastThe shortages hitting countries around the worldFar-right journalist poses new threat to Macron'Why is PM Modi's photo on my vaccine certificate?'Flying Doctors take vaccines to Australia's outback. VideoFlying Doctors take vaccines to Australia's outbackWhen Britain went to the 'Iron Curtain Olympics'The battle to make lighter life-saving body armourColin Powell: Vietnam vet to secretary of stateI get abuse and threats online - why can't it be stopped?BBC Future: The race to save New York's shipwrecksHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?1Polish PM accuses EU of blackmail in law row2New Delta Covid mutant under close watch in UK3US football coach fired for refusing vaccine4Why are UK Covid cases so high?5Diver finds crusader sword off Israel's coast6The shortages hitting countries around the world7Fears grow for girl missing from Australia campsite8Kanye West officially changes his name to Ye9Russia bans male 'extremist' group for online hate10North Korea fires missile into waters off Japan© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.