What are the Delta, Gamma, Beta and Alpha Covid variants?By Michelle RobertsHealth editor, BBC News onlineOfficials are keeping a close watch on a new descendent of the Delta variant of Covid, which is causing a growing number of infections in the UK.AY.4.2 - which some are calling "Delta plus"- has changes or mutations that might potentially help the virus survive more effectively.  What is the Delta variant and the new mutations?There are thousands of different types, or variants, of Covid circulating across the world. One of them, known as Delta or B.1.617.2, first identified in India, appears to be spreading quickly in many countries. Delta has become the dominant variant in the UK, where it is considered a "variant of concern" - meaning health officials watch it closely.In July 2021 experts identified a new relative called AY.4.2.This Delta offshoot has been increasing slowly since then. It includes some new mutations affecting the spike protein, which the virus uses to penetrate our cells. So far, there's no indication that it's significantly more transmissible as a result of these changes, but experts are studying it closely. It's not yet been categorised as a variant of concern, or a variant under investigation. Experts say it's unlikely to take off in a big way or defeat the current vaccines. Other current variants of concern include:Viruses mutate all the time and most changes are inconsequential. Some even harm the virus. But others can make the disease more infectious or threatening - and these mutations tend to dominate. There is no evidence that Delta, AY.4.2 - or any of the other variants - cause more serious illness for the vast majority of people. As with the original version, the risk remains highest for people who are elderly or have significant underlying health conditions. But even so, if a variant is more infectious it will lead to more deaths in an unvaccinated population.Vaccines offer high protection against severe illness with Covid-19, including infections caused by variants of concern. The shots also reduce the risk of infection. But they do not completely eliminate all risk. The advice to avoid infection remains the same for all strains: wash your hands, keep your distance, wear a face covering in crowded places and be vigilant about ventilation.The variants of concern have all undergone changes to their spike protein - the part of the virus which attaches to human cells.Delta has some potentially important ones (such as L452R) that might make it spread more easily.One mutation, called N501Y, shared by the Alpha, Gamma and Beta, seems to make the virus better at infecting cells and spreading. Beta and Gamma also have a key mutation, called E484K, that may help the virus sidestep some of the body's immune defences.Experts have found a small number of cases of Alpha with this change too.Will vaccines still work against variants?Current vaccines were designed for earlier versions of coronavirus, which means they may not be the ideal match for new variants and so might not work quite as well.But experts say they are still very effective at protecting lives by cutting the risk of severe illness:Doctors say it is vital that people get the recommended number of doses to gain maximum protection against existing and emerging variants. Across the UK, additional booster jabs are being offered to:Latest data from the NHS shows 3.7 million people in England have had a booster jab.Although Covid infections have been rising again across the UK, the number of hospitalisations and deaths has remained well below the levels seen in earlier waves, which experts attribute to the success of the vaccine programme. Polish PM accuses EU of blackmail in law rowMateusz Morawiecki clashes with EU leaders over a Polish court ruling that rejected parts of EU law.Taliban urged to lift ban on girls' education. VideoTaliban urged to lift ban on girls' educationDiver finds crusader sword off Israel's coastThe shortages hitting countries around the worldFar-right journalist poses new threat to Macron'Why is PM Modi's photo on my vaccine certificate?'Flying Doctors take vaccines to Australia's outback. VideoFlying Doctors take vaccines to Australia's outbackWhen Britain went to the 'Iron Curtain Olympics'The battle to make lighter life-saving body armourColin Powell: Vietnam vet to secretary of stateI get abuse and threats online - why can't it be stopped?BBC Future: The race to save New York's shipwrecksHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?1Polish PM accuses EU of blackmail in law row2New Delta Covid mutant under close watch in UK3US football coach fired for refusing vaccine4Why are UK Covid cases so high?5Diver finds crusader sword off Israel's coast6The shortages hitting countries around the world7Fears grow for girl missing from Australia campsite8Kanye West officially changes his name to Ye9Russia bans male 'extremist' group for online hate10North Korea fires missile into waters off Japan© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.