Sir David Amess: We must learn from hideous killing, says Commons Speaker Lindsay HoyleThe House of Commons Speaker Sir Lindsay Hoyle has said "we must learn" from the "hideous killing" of Sir David Amess, and ensure MPs are protected.The Chorley MP told the BBC he would review safety measures - but also warned against a "knee-jerk reaction".He said it was important to "protect our democracy" against "people who hate our values and the democratic process". He also urged MPs to take up the security options currently on offer.Sir Lindsay praised Sir David as a "well-loved" politician who "got the best out of the job".He said MPs would be able to pay tribute in the House of Commons on Monday, followed by a church service. He also said it would be right to install a plaque in the House of Commons to honour Sir David, as happened following the murder of MP Jo Cox in 2016.Speaking to the BBC's Andrew Marr, Home Secretary Priti Patel said she and the Speaker were looking at "practical measures" to protect MPs.But she stressed that any action should be "proportionate to the risk" and that MPs should remain "accessible".Sir David, 69, was stabbed multiple times at Belfairs Methodist Church in Leigh-on-Sea, where he had been meeting members of the public. A man arrested by police after the killing is Ali Harbi Ali, a 25-year-old British citizen of Somali heritage, Whitehall officials have told the BBC.Police say he is being held at a London police station under the Terrorism Act 2000. It has also emerged that some years ago he was referred to the government's counter-extremism programme, Prevent, although it is thought he did not spend long in the scheme and he was not on MI5's watch list.Teachers, members of the public, the NHS and others can refer individuals to a local panel of police, social workers and other experts who decide whether and how to intervene in their lives. The attack has led MPs and their staff to question whether they are still safe to meet constituents face-to-face without police protection. Sir Lindsay said it was "right" that he went ahead with his own two-hour surgery in his constituency in Lancashire on Friday, hours after hearing of the attack on Sir David.MPs regularly hold surgeries in public buildings, such as churches and libraries, where constituents can seek advice and support. "My constituents needed access to me - I gave them that access," Sir Lindsay said.He acknowledged people would be "very worried" and said it was important to get "the best outcome out of this hideous killing"."We will look at all the different measures, we will review measures, we will also remind members - please take up the measures available to you," he said. Since Jo Cox's murder, MPs have increasingly been taking more security precautions.In 2016, Labour's Jess Phillips told the BBC she had installed a panic room in her office and locksmiths had "overhauled" her house. Other MPs, including Labour's deputy leader Angela Rayner and Conservative minister Caroline Dinenage, have said they have had emergency buttons fitted in their homes. What security is currently in place?Most MPs do not get close protection while in their constituencies, but security was increased following Ms Cox's killing.All MPs were offered panic buttons, extra lighting, additional locks and emergency fobs at their homes and constituency offices. The spending on such measures soared from £170,576 in 2015/16 to £4.5m two years later.Writing in the Observer and the Mail on Sunday, Sir Lindsay also called for an end to "the hate which drives... attacks" against MPs."If anything positive is to come out of this latest awful tragedy," he said, "it is that the quality of political discourse has to change. The conversation has to be kinder and based on respect." Ms Patel said abuse directed to MPs - as well as the wider population - could be "very corrosive" but said the government would adopt a "balanced" approach towards banning anonymous accounts, as they could be used by "pro-democracy" movements.Labour MP Diane Abbott - who has been the target of a large volume of online abuse - told the BBC it could be "very traumatic".She said social media companies needed to do "a lot more" to take down abusive accounts.The London MP opposed suggestions that police could be sent to guard MPs' constituencies."One of my colleagues tried that and the numbers that came in just dropped," she said. Asked about the possibility of ramping up security at MPs' surgeries, Ms Patel said it was one of a "range of measures" that could keep politicians safe.But she added it should be considered on a case-by-case basis and be proportionate to the risk posed. The home secretary advised that MPs could improve their security by only seeing constituents who have pre-booked an appointment and checking the backgrounds of the individuals. MP murder suspect held under Terrorism ActShould MPs still be able to meet the public?Jo Cox's sister urged to quit as MP by partnerPolish PM accuses EU of blackmail in law rowMateusz Morawiecki clashes with EU leaders over a Polish court ruling that rejected parts of EU law.Taliban urged to lift ban on girls' education. VideoTaliban urged to lift ban on girls' educationDiver finds crusader sword off Israel's coastThe shortages hitting countries around the worldFar-right journalist poses new threat to Macron'Why is PM Modi's photo on my vaccine certificate?'Flying Doctors take vaccines to Australia's outback. VideoFlying Doctors take vaccines to Australia's outbackWhen Britain went to the 'Iron Curtain Olympics'The battle to make lighter life-saving body armourColin Powell: Vietnam vet to secretary of stateI get abuse and threats online - why can't it be stopped?BBC Future: The race to save New York's shipwrecksHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?1Polish PM accuses EU of blackmail in law row2New Delta Covid mutant under close watch in UK3US football coach fired for refusing vaccine4Why are UK Covid cases so high?5Diver finds crusader sword off Israel's coast6The shortages hitting countries around the world7Fears grow for girl missing from Australia campsite8Kanye West officially changes his name to Ye9Russia bans male 'extremist' group for online hate10North Korea fires missile into waters off Japan© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.