Heat pump grants worth £5,000 to replace gas boilers not enough, say critics
The England and Wales subsidies cover just 90,000 gas boilers out of more than 20 million households.
 
Inflation: Food price rises are 'terrifying' warns industry
Food and drink firms are seeing price rises of as much as 18% while manufacturers struggle with costs.
 
Energy price cap not working, says power boss
The owner of Scottish Power says capping domestic energy prices has caused long-term harm to the market.
 
Biggest fall in HGV drivers among the middle-aged
Driver numbers peaked in 2017 but those aged 46 to 55 years have recorded a sharp decline.
 
Heathrow passenger charge to be curbed
The airport has been told it cannot raise its charges for airlines by as much as it would have liked.
 
Tesco opens its first checkout-free store
The supermarket's new GetGo format lets customers shop without scanning a product or using a till.
 
Asda to hire 15,000 workers ahead of Christmas
The supermarket says it is confident it can find temporary workers despite record job vacancies.
 
Foreign investment deals to create 30,000 UK jobs, says government
The prime minister will announce 18 new foreign investment deals in low-carbon sectors worth £9.7bn.
 
One in three music industry jobs were lost during pandemic
Musicians as well as people working in venues and recording studios were particularly affected.
 
UK firms will have to disclose climate impact
Chancellor Rishi Sunak will bring in new rules around environmental sustainability reporting.
 
Apple unveils new computer chips amid shortage
The new M1 Pro and M1 Max chips expand the firm's use of silicon it has designed.
 
Goto Energy goes bust amid rising gas prices
Its collapse takes the number of customers affected by energy company failures to more than two million.
 
Amazon's Jeff Bezos 'may have lied to Congress'
Top lawmakers say Mr Bezos and other Amazon executives may have misled them about the firm's business practices.
 
Amazon offers bonuses of up to £3,000 in run-up to Christmas
The online retail giant is trying to attract enough UK workers to fill 20,000 posts over Christmas.
 
Ford's Merseyside investment to secure 500 UK jobs
The carmaking giant is investing £230m in its Halewood plant as it moves to electrify its vehicles.
 
Klarna to offer pay now option ahead of crackdown
The buy now, pay later firm announces changes in the UK, ahead of an expected crackdown on the market.
 
Bank of England says it will act on inflation
Governor Andrew Bailey's warning is seen as his clearest hint yet that interest rates will rise.
 
Hut Group boss dumps 'golden share' in overhaul
A structure allowing the founder of the health and beauty firm to block takeovers is being removed.
 
China's growth slowdown suggests recovery is losing steam
The world's second largest economy expanded by less than expected in the third quarter.
 
Scams: Cost of impact on wellbeing calculated as £9bn a year
Consumer group Which? says costs to victims' well-being are greater than the amount stolen by fraudsters.
 
Facebook to hire 10,000 in EU to work on metaverse
Mark Zuckerberg is a leading voice on the metaverse - a virtual reality version of the internet.
 
Gas price rises: Russia not withholding supplies, says ambassador to UK
Russia is not slowing gas supplies for political reasons, Andrei Kelin says.
 
Why Christmas could be stuck in a shipping container
China is the factory of the world but exports have been hindered by the global supply chain crisis.
 
You may be able to book a flying taxi within three years
Firms are racing to bring flying taxis and the mini-airports they need into service.
 
Why 2.3 million US children could miss out on expanded tax credit
About 67 million US children are eligible for new benefits, but some of the most vulnerable are missing out.
 
Morrisons takeover: Bradford retail giant in the bagging area
As shareholders prepare to vote on a £7bn takeover, what are the views from Morrisons' birthplace?
 
Can African tech giant Jumia deliver on its promise?
Can Africa-focussed tech giant Jumia deliver on its promises to a new generation of consumers?
 
Fashionable farming - the people growing their own clothes
A team of people in the north of England are now making clothes, from seeds to finished garments.
 
CEO Secrets: 'No need to convince the haters you're worthy'
Michele Roberts, executive director of the National Basketball Players Association, shares her CEO Secrets.
 
Why does the internet keep breaking?
Outages of Facebook and its family of apps now lead to significant disruption for firms worldwide
 
Smart headbands claim to make people calmer. Do they work?
Devices that measure brainwaves are increasingly being used by athletes to improve their performance.
 
Why are energy prices soaring?
The perfect storm of long and short-term factors driving the energy crunch.
 
