R 4.0.3 now available
The R Core Team has released R 4.0.3 (codename: "Bunny-Wunnies Freak Out"), the latest update to the R statistical computing system. This is a minor update to the R 4.0.x series, and so should not require any changes to existing R 4.0 scripts or packages. It is available for download for Windows, Mac and Linux systems from your local CRAN mirror. This release includes minor improvements and bug fixes including improved timezone support on MacOS, improved labels on dot charts, better handling of large tables for Fisher's Exact Test and Chi-Square tests, and control over timeouts for internet connections. For...
 
Microsoft R Open 4.0.2 now available
Microsoft R Open 4.0.2 has been released, combining the latest R language engine with multi-processor performance and tools for managing R packages reproducibly. You can download Microsoft R Open 4.0.2 for Windows,and Linux from MRAN now. Microsoft R Open is 100% compatible with all R version 4 scripts and packages, and works with all your favorite R interfaces and development environments. This update brings R version 4 to Microsoft R Open for the first time. This update includes many new features for the R language and system, along with improved performance and memory usage. Note that you will need to...
 
MLOPS with R and GitHub Actions
With thanks to the kind folks at Lander Analytics, video from my New York R Conference talk earlier this month is now available to view. The slides are also available for download in PDF format. In my talk, I described how I automated the deployment of a Shiny app using GitHub Actions. If you're new to GitHub Actions, it's pretty simple to set up a continuous deployment process: Define jobs as YAML files in the .github/workflows folder of your GitHub repository Search the GitHub Actions Marketplace for templates of tasks you'd like to perform Push changes to your workflow to...
 
The History of R (updated for 2020)
As an update to this post, here's a list of the major events in R history since its creation: 1992: R development begins as a research project in Auckland, NZ by Robert Gentleman and Ross Ihaka 1993: First binary versions of R published at Statlib 1995: R first distributed as open-source software, under GPL2 license 1997: R core group formed 1997: CRAN founded (by Kurt Hornik and Fritz Leisch) 1999: The R website, r-project.org, founded 1999: First in-person meeting of R Core team, at inaugural Directions in Statistical Computing conference, Vienna 2000: R 1.0.0 released (February 29) 2000: John Chambers,...
 
