Liverpool Women's Hospital explosion declared a terror incident
Boris Johnson will chair an emergency Cobra meeting after the explosion outside a Liverpool hospital.
 
Covid booster doses will be offered to over-40s
Also, 16- and 17-year-olds should receive a second dose of vaccine, according to official UK advice.
 
Children in hospital as Dulwich school's ceiling collapses
A second-floor ceiling collapsed at Rosemead Prep School in south-east London.
 
Poland border crisis: EU to widen Belarus sanctions as row intensifies
As EU officials discuss new sanctions, migrants gather in a tense stand-off at the Polish border.
 
HS2 rail extension to Leeds set to be scrapped
Plans to extend the eastern leg of the high speed network will be ditched in favour of new shorter links.
 
Australian women sue over Qatar airport strip-searches
They are seeking damages after being forced into examinations at Doha airport last year.
 
Danny Fenster: US journalist freed from Myanmar jail
Danny Fenster will be allowed to leave the country just days after getting an 11-year sentence.
 
Astroworld: Boy, nine, dies days after crush at Travis Scott festival
Ezra Blount is the youngest of 10 people killed after panic broke out during rapper Travis Scott's show.
 
Sarah Benford: New search in Kettering for teen missing since 2000
Fourteen-year-old Sarah Benford was last seen after absconding from a care home.
 
Shell plans to move headquarters to the UK
The oil giant will shift its tax residence from the Netherlands to the UK and its boss will relocate.
 
MPs find 'serious failings' in sickle cell care
Parliamentary report says some patients report being racially abused by doctors and nurses.
 
Maori tribe tells anti-vaccine protestors to stop using popular haka
The popular Ke Mata haka was performed by anti-vaccine protesters during demonstrations last week.
 
Adele and Oprah discuss divorce, weight loss and Taylor Swift
The star discussed her divorce, weight loss and Taylor Swift in her first TV interview for years.
 
The Uyghur woman fighting to keep her culture alive
In London, a restaurant owner aims to preserve traditions which are under threat in China.
 
Libby Clegg: 'Hatti gave me an identity away from the track'
Paralympic champion Libby Clegg has described how her guide dog helped her find an identity.
 
Dunston footballer Phil Turnbull attempts to fix failed floodlights
Midfielder Phil Turnbull, who is a cable jointer, tries to repair the lights at an FA Trophy match.
 
Mental health: Man's train station sign aims to change lives
Ben Ogden stands with a sign in Leeds train station and explains why it’s OK to not be OK.
 
'I had concerns about marriage', admits Malala Yousafzai
The Nobel laureate says she previously questioned marriage and the "imbalance of power".
 
Remembrance Sunday: Royals and politicians lay wreaths as nation remembers war dead
The nation fell silent at 11:00GMT to honour those who have died in conflict.
 
Arctic walrus spotted on Northumberland beach
Conservationists appeal for people to stay away from the walrus at Seahouses to keep it safe.
 
'I've been teaching for 50 years and still loving it'
Joanna Harriot has been a teacher in west Belfast since taking up her first post in 1972.
 
Jair Bolsonaro and guns: A US culture war raging in Brazil
Gun culture was part of Bolsonaro's winning presidential campaign. Three years on, what's the impact?
 
A Nobel prize-winning economist's guide to cooking
Abhijeet Banerjee's irreverent new cookbook draws on both his culinary instincts and his academic insights.
 
Why China is still trying to achieve zero Covid
While other countries grapple with living with Covid, China is doubling down on stamping it out.
 
Covid vaccine ‘waning immunity’: How worried should I be?
Is the effectiveness of Covid vaccines waning over time? We look at how much protection being double vaccinated offers.
 
David Buick: the motoring pioneer who lost everything
Scottish-born car maker David Buick made two fortunes during his lifetime - and lost them both.
 
The robots behind the bar that want to pull your next pint
A growing number of tech firms have developed robots the say could replace bar staff.
 
Ethiopia's Tigray conflict: Why the rest of the world is worried
The stability of the Horn of Africa in part rests on a peaceful resolution to Ethiopia's civil war.
 
Robert Bradford: 'Find the killers of MP and my brother'
Belfast man describes 40-year search for justice after IRA double murder in November 1981.
 
Gareth Bale: Manager Robert Page says Real Madrid forward will not start for Wales against Belgium
Wales manager Robert Page says Real Madrid forward Gareth Bale will not start Tuesday's final World Cup group match against Belgium.
 
Rashid supports Rafiq's allegation Vaughan made racist comment
England bowler Adil Rashid is the third player to say he heard Michael Vaughan make a racist comment to a group of Asian cricketers.
 
'Robbed' South Africa seek World Cup qualifier replay after 'questionable decisions' in defeat by Ghana
South Africa are set to make a "formal complaint" about "questionable decisions" made by match officials in Sunday's 1-0 defeat by Ghana, says their football association chief.
 
'Typical Australia reinvigorated just in time for Ashes'
It is typical of Australia that they found a way to win the T20 World Cup - the perfect confidence boost three weeks before England are in town.
 
Norwich City: Dean Smith named new Canaries head coach
Norwich City confirm Dean Smith as the club's new head coach on a two-and-a-half year deal.
 
COP26: The two week summit in two minutes
The UN’s climate summit has come to an end after two weeks in Glasgow, here are some of the stand out moments.
 
COP26: How much is spent supporting fossil fuels and green energy?
Despite green energy investment promises, many governments still financially back the fossil fuel industry.
 
COP26: How might decisions at the climate summit change our lives?
The changes made at COP26 in Glasgow could have implications for the way we live.
 
Climate change: What emission cuts has India promised?
India has pledged new targets at the Glasgow climate summit, but is it on track to achieve them?
 
COP26: Alok Sharma fights back tears as Glasgow Climate Pact agreed
The COP26 president apologised as a late amendment on coal was added to the draft text by India.
 
COP26 climate deal: 'It won't save us from drowning'
Young activists on the frontline of climate change explain what the deal struck at COP26 means to them.
 
Renewable energy: How Scottish Isle of Eigg relies on wind, water, solar
As the world slowly moves away from using fossil fuels for electricity, a tiny Scottish island has shown it’s possible to rely almost entirely on renewables.
 
COP26: What was agreed at the Glasgow climate conference?
A crucial climate change summit has been held in the UK which could change our lives.
 
What is net zero and how are the UK and other countries doing?
Experts want countries to adopt targets to reduce emissions to net zero by 2050.
 
Climate change: Do I need to stop eating meat?
Some people are switching to plant-based diets to reduce their carbon footprint.
 
COP26: The story from Glasgow in 15 pictures
The most eye-catching demonstrations and unusual stories during COP26 have unfolded on the streets of Glasgow.
 
What are the UK travel rules, what tests do I need and can I visit the US?
Restrictions on travelling to the US are being relaxed
 
Covid: Are booster jabs available for my age group?
All over-40s should be offered a booster vaccination, the government's advisory committee says.
 
What are the rules and guidance for face masks and coverings?
Face coverings could become a legal requirement in England again if the NHS struggles this winter.
 
Covid: How do I get a lateral flow or PCR test?
Lateral flow tests are more accurate than first thought, according to new research.
 
Covid-19 in the UK: How many coronavirus cases are there in my area?
Explore the data on coronavirus in the UK and find out how many cases there are in your area.
 
The court orders depriving vulnerable children of their ‘liberty’
How vulnerable children in England are being detained in temporary accommodation under special "draconian" court orders.
 
The extraordinary story of how 300 volunteers rescued a stranded caver
One of the UK's longest cave rescue operations has ended safely after 250 volunteers came together from across the country.
 
FA Cup: Wimbledon's storied Plough Lane past and the new chapter being written
The FA Cup has a special place in Wimbledon's remarkable history. On Saturday, fans could finally witness its return to Plough Lane.
 
Erin Pizzey: The woman who looked beyond the bruises
In 1971, Erin Pizzey set up the first domestic abuse shelter. Why is she now a men's rights advocate?
 
‘As a child I saw the plane crash that killed my sisters'
Harriet was waving her sisters off when the plane left the runway and burned. Now she's finding others linked to the tragedy.
 
