Net zero announcement: UK sets out plans to cut greenhouse gas emissions
The government reveals its long-awaited strategy days before global leaders meet for COP26 in Glasgow.
 
Heat pump grants worth £5,000 to replace gas boilers not enough, say critics
The England and Wales subsidies cover just 90,000 gas boilers out of more than 20 million households.
 
Harassment and bullying MPs could face vote to trigger election
Labour says a government plan to close a loophole in future cases should also apply retrospectively.
 
Lord Janner: Police shut down MP child abuse investigations - report
An inquiry finds police seemed "reluctant to investigate" claims against former MP Lord Janner.
 
UKIP: Ex-Conservative minister Neil Hamilton elected party leader
Mr Hamilton joined UKIP in 2011 and represented the party in the Welsh Parliament for five years.
 
Foreign investment deals to create 30,000 UK jobs, says government
The prime minister will announce 18 new foreign investment deals in low-carbon sectors worth £9.7bn.
 
Sir David Amess: MPs pay emotional tributes to former colleague
MPs have been remembering their former colleague, who was stabbed to death in his Essex constituency.
 
Welsh independence to be considered by commission
Independence is one of the options a commission on Wales' future in the UK will look at.
 
Our families fear for our personal safety, say MPs
MPs have described their experience of threats to their safety as tributes are paid to Sir David Amess.
 
Sir David Amess death: Jo Cox's husband had 'physical reaction' to killing
Brendan Cox, whose wife was killed in 2016, had a "physical reaction" to Sir David Amess' death.
 
Brighton bin strike: Deal could end weeks of waste pile-up, union says
Union and council officials reach a provisional agreement after 13 days of industrial action.
 
Sir David Amess death: Mural appears at Leigh-on-Sea skatepark
The artist who sprayed the tribute says it is a "thank you from this community" to the MP.
 
No 10 denies PM broke Christmas Covid rules
Downing Street faced questions whether the PM and Mrs Johnson hosted a friend on Christmas Day despite restrictions.
 
Matt Hancock's United Nations role withdrawn
His appointment to the UN's economic commission for Africa was announced earlier this week.
 
Tributes following death of former Labour MP Ernie Ross
Ernie Ross, who was the MP for Dundee West from 1979 until 2005, died in the city on Sunday.
 
Sir David Amess: We must learn from hideous killing, says Commons Speaker Lindsay Hoyle
Commons Speaker Sir Lindsay Hoyle says MPs should be protected - but warns against a knee-jerk response.
 
Sir David Amess: Man arrested over MP Chris Bryant death threat
An MP says he was threatened after asking people to be kinder following Sir David Amess's death.
 
Sir David Amess killing: Should MPs still be able to meet the public?
The home secretary is reviewing MPs' security but says they must remain accessible to voters.
 
Sir David Amess: Southend city bid would be a 'fitting tribute' to stabbed MP
Granting this to Southend, they say, would be a fitting tribute to the late Sir David Amess, who championed the cause.
 
David Amess death: MPs could get police guards at surgeries
Priti Patel says she is looking at ways to protect MPs but action should be "proportionate" to risk.
 
NI MPs contacted by police over security after Sir David Amess killing
The justice minister says the chief constable has contacted MPs following the killing of Sir David Amess.
 
Sir David Amess: Fun, friendly and always outspoken
The Tory MP was a backbencher of the old school who fought for the causes he cared about.
 
Sir David Amess killing was terrorism, police say
The fatal stabbing of Tory MP Sir David Amess has a potential link to Islamist extremism, say detectives.
 
Sir David Amess: Boris Johnson leads tributes to much-loved MP
Friends and colleagues remember Essex MP David Amess's "wonderful smile" and "photographic memory".
 
COP26: China's Xi Jinping unlikely to attend, UK PM told
The UK has been warned the Chinese president is not likely to come, UK government sources say.
 
Huge rise in domestic abuse cases being dropped in England and Wales
Police in England and Wales are increasingly running out of time to bring charges, the BBC discovers.
 
Claudia Webbe: MP faces Labour Party expulsion
Leicester East MP Claudia Webbe has 14 days to appeal after Labour begins fresh disciplinary action.
 
Brexit: Lord Frost and Šefčovič discuss NI Protocol in Brussels
Lord Frost has met his EU counterpart Maros Šefčovič to discuss the new trade proposals.
 
French finance minister: Brexit made UK supply chain crisis worse
France's finance minister also told the BBC that Europe will be one the world's key economic powers.
 
YouTube U-turns over David Davis vaccination passports clip after protest
The site says "sometimes we make the wrong call" after being accused of attacking free speech.
 
Lorry driver shortage: Government to lift rules on foreign haulier deliveries
Ministers want to lift the limit on how many deliveries overseas lorry drivers can make in the UK.
 
Overseas abattoir workers to get temporary visas
The government is to allow butchers into the UK on temporary visas after warnings of mass culls.
 
Channel migration: Border boat staff don't need immunity from prosecution, says union
Home Secretary Priti Patel is reportedly planning to exempt staff from prosecution if migrants die.
 
Covid-19: Cheaper travel tests to start on 24 October
People in England going away for half term will be able to book lateral flow tests, the government says.
 
Labour: Miliband on government heat pump grant for gas boilers
Government plans to replace boilers with heat pumps are "way short even of their targets" says the shadow climate change secretary.
 
Boris Johnson defends UK switching to green power by 2035
The PM defends plans to move entirely to green power generation by 2035, saying that it is propelled by "consumer choice".
 
Sir David Amess death: Parliament pays tribute to former colleague
MPs have been remembering Sir David Amess, who was killed in his Essex constituency.
 
Boris Johnson pays tribute to Sir David Amess in Commons
Boris Johnson announces the Queen has agreed city status for Southend, thanks to Sir David Amess’ campaign.
 
Minute's silence for Sir David Amess in House of Commons
The Speaker’s chaplain leads a minute’s silence in the House of Commons for Sir David Amess MP.
 
Sir David Amess: The lesser-known concerns of the Southend West MP
Hospice care, post offices and women's mental health are among the causes championed by the MP.
 
Climate change: Is the UK on track to meet its targets?
With weeks to go until the UK hosts a global climate summit, is the government on track to meet its own commitments?
 
Sir David Amess stabbing: What we know so far
What happened, what we know about the suspect, who the MP was, and what witnesses saw.
 
Sir David Amess killing: Security for politicians is a global dilemma
Why the need to be a people's representative and the need for personal safety are in constant conflict.
 
Brexit: What's the Northern Ireland Protocol?
The EU has outlined new proposals for the Northern Ireland Protocol.
 
How are the Scottish Greens settling in to government?
The party now has a small voice inside the Scottish government rather than a big one in opposition.
 
Northern Ireland: Did anyone warn about Brexit checks?
Brexit checks have caused tensions in Northern Ireland but were there warnings in the 2016 referendum campaign?
 
Party political conferences: What to expect this year
Our guide to what conferences are, when and where they're taking place, and what's likely to happen.
 
Who is in Boris Johnson's cabinet?
Prime Minister Boris Johnson reshuffles his cabinet for the first time since February 2020. Who's in it now?
 
Universal credit: End of the £20 boost explained
The £20-a-week boost to universal credit is being withdrawn.
 
Pandora Papers: Why are donations to political parties often so controversial?
The Pandora Papers leak has once again cast a spotlight on the funding of UK political parties by wealthy donors.
 
Conservatives: Who funds them, and what's in it for them?
To be in the top 10 of Conservative donors, you're going to need a seven figure sum.
 
Pandora Papers: Your guide to nine years of finance leaks
What have been the major financial disclosures and what action has been taken?
 
Nadine Dorries: Best-selling author, nurse, reality star and, now, cabinet minister
Mistrusted by some in the arts, the new culture secretary is said by a colleague to be "up for the fight".
 
