
			Milestones in AI, Machine Learning, Data Science, and visualization with R and Python since 2008
		
« Microsoft365R: an R interface to the Microsoft 365 suite |
	Main
	| Outlook client support in Microsoft365R available for beta test »
I’m happy to announce that version 2.0 of Microsoft365R, the R interface to Microsoft 365, is now on CRAN! This version adds support for Microsoft Teams, a much-requested feature.To access a team in Microsoft Teams, use the get_team() function and provide the team name or ID. You can also list the teams you’re in with list_teams(). These return objects of R6 class ms_team, which has methods for working with channels and drives.A drive is an ms_drive object, so if you’re already using Microsoft365R to interface with OneDrive and SharePoint document libraries, you already know how to use a team’s drives. Each team will generally have at least one drive, and possibly two: the default “Shared Documents” drive, which is where uploaded files are stored, and the “Teams Wiki Data” drive, if the team has a wiki. Each team channel will usually also have an associated folder in each drive.A team object has methods for listing, retrieving, creating and deleting channels. However you should not create and delete channels unnecessarily, since Teams tracks all channels ever created, even after you delete them. In turn, a channel object has methods for listing and sending messages, and uploading and deleting files.Teams channels are semi-threaded. Getting the list of messages for a channel retrieves only the first message in each thread; to get an entire thread, you get the starting message and then retrieve the replies to it. Note that channels don’t have nested replies, so you can’t reply to a reply—only to the starting message.The body of a message is part of the list of properties returned from the host, and can be found in the properties field of the object. Other properties include metadata such as the author, date, list of attachments, etc.You can send a message to a channel as plain text (the default) or HTML. A message can also include attachments and inline images.Currently, Microsoft365R only supports messaging in channels. Support for chats between individuals may come later.Uploading a file to a channel will place it in the channel’s drive folder. The channel object itself provides convenience functions to list, upload and download files. It also provides a get_folder() method to retrieve the folder for the channel, as an ms_drive_item object; this object has more general methods for working with files.Let us know how this works for you! You can provide feedback and make feature requests by opening an issue at the repo, or by emailing me at hongooi73 (@) gmail.com.
Posted by Hong Ooi at 09:30 in Microsoft, packages, R  | Permalink
 You can follow this conversation by subscribing to the comment feed for this post.
		Posted by:
		Adrew |
		March 18, 2021 at 14:47

	The comments to this entry are closed.
