Amazon pays £290m in UK tax as sales surge to £14bnThese are external links and will open in a new windowOnline retail giant Amazon paid £293m in tax in the UK last year, while its sales surged 26% to £13.73bn.The firm, which employs 33,000 people in the UK, said the taxes included business rates, corporation tax, stamp duty and other contributions. Amazon and other tech firms have faced scrutiny over how much tax they pay in the UK, prompting the government launch a tougher digital sales tax in April. Amazon said it pays "all taxes required in the UK"."We are investing heavily in creating jobs and infrastructure across the UK - more than £23bn since 2010," the company said in a statement. "We pay all taxes required in the UK and every country where we operate," it said."Corporation tax is based on profits, not revenues, and our profits have remained low given retail is a highly-competitive, low margin business and we continue to invest heavily."In April, the UK launched a 2% tax on digital sales amid concerns that big tech firms we re-routing their profits through low tax jurisdictions. Defending the plan, Chancellor Rishi Sunak said in June that the coronavirus crisis had made tech giants even "more powerful and more profitable".He added that firms like Google, Amazon and Facebook needed "to pay their fair share of tax".Amazon has been expanding in the UK this year, as more people shop online due to lockdown restrictions. The company said last week it would create a further 7,000 UK jobs this year to meet growing demand, taking its total permanent workforce to 40,000 by the end of the year. It is also recruiting 20,000 seasonal posts for the festive period. Amazon is led by world's richest man Jeff Bezos, whose personal fortune rose as high as $200bn (£155bn) in recent weeks as tech firms' stock market valuations soared.  The company as a whole posted sales of $281bn for 2019 and net profits of $11.6bn.
        Share this story        About sharing
A new legal limit will be enforced through a £100 fine but will not apply to schools or workplaces.
        
        Features
    'We just want to live on the land we legally own'Will unis be exempt from the new rules? And other questionsThe 310-mile border at the heart of BrexitHas Trump kept his promises on the military?Why the R number is important to fight coronavirusThe mums asking suicidal teens to 'please stay'Making art from plants during lockdown'The railway has re-energised our community'The game creators getting hate mail over tiny pink blobs
    
    Elsewhere on the BBC

Children with special educational needs
Are they let down by the system?
Daily news briefing direct to your inbox
