Energy firms' collapse hits 1.5 million customers
The government is understood to have cooled on supporting big energy firms with state-backed loans.
 
Working from home: Staff abuse it, says City boss
Staff should not have the right to ask for flexible working from day one of new job, an employer says.
 
Evergrande: Shares in crisis-hit firm jump as debt deadline looms
The debt-laden developer is due to make a $83.5m interest payment on an overseas bond on Thursday.
 
Food firms warn of panic-buying this Christmas
Gaps on supermarket shelves may become commonplace as labour shortages bite, industry bodies say.
 
Taiwan seeks entry into key trade pact before China
Taiwan has warned that its application into the CPTPP could be affected should China join first.
 
Travel rule change delayed by lateral flow test shortage
Transport Secretary Grant Shapps says private Covid testing firms cannot supply enough lateral flow tests.
 
Covid debt: A baby, job loss - and now eviction
Tenants are being evicted due to rent arrears built up during the pandemic, an investigation finds.
 
US economy continues to strengthen despite Delta, says Fed
The central bank may start paring back its emergency support for the economy "soon" - but didn't say when.
 
Avro Energy and Green go bust amid warning more to come
Avro and Green collapse, with hundreds of thousands of customers facing higher bills with new suppliers.
 
US lifting ban on imports of British lamb, says Boris Johnson
The PM admits the UK is now aiming only for "incremental steps" on US trade, rather than a full agreement.
 
Changing China: Why Xi Jinping is leading a way back to socialism
China has not been very socialist for years, but the Communist Party looks set to change that.
 
Vauxhall Motors plans Luton job losses amid chip crisis
The Unite union says it will "do everything in our power to mitigate or prevent" job losses.
 
Gas price crisis: Food firms face huge price rise for carbon dioxide
The US supplier of CO2, which will receive millions in UK taxpayer support to reopen, will hike prices.
 
Fraudsters steal £4m a day as crime surges
Total losses through fraud rockets by 30% in the first half of the year, with many victims not refunded.
 
Catalogue of errors led to £1bn of state pension underpayments
The National Audit Office says 134,000 pensioners, mostly women, were affected by a preventable scandal.
 
Pret to hire 3,000 new staff as city workers return
The coffee and sandwich chain plans to hire 3,000 staff after cutting same number in 2020.
 
CEO Secrets: 'In my business, you eat what you kill'
Music executive Riki Bleau shares his business advice for our CEO Secrets series.
 
German elections: Businesses face future without Merkel
Many companies in Germany are focused on short-term survival in the hope of medium-term revival.
 
How 'nerd' culture powered through the pandemic
Meet the online content creators beating the odds to build successful careers from their passions.
 
Can apps manage our chronic health conditions?
A Swedish tech firm has created an app to help alleviate people's joint pain.
 
'Looking back, it was an amazing thing I did'
Meet the founder on a 10-year mission to disrupt Japan's rigid work culture.
 
Gen Z battles to bring back unions, one Starbucks at a time
Younger Americans are reviving US labour activism amid stagnant wages and Covid hardship.
 
Why taking up an instrument has struck a chord for so many
The pandemic led to around 1m UK adults learning an instrument and many taking music lessons.
 
CEO Secrets: 'You can run a business and have a baby'
Planning for a maternity leave when you're the boss of a fast-growing company.
 
Why even giant ships can't solve the shipping crisis
A shortage of vessels is hampering global trade and may lead to empty shelves before Christmas.
 
Amazon's Cape Town base: The battle to save South African culture
Some indigenous groups say the planned office in Cape Town is on culturally important land.
 
