Astroworld: Boy, nine, dies days after crush at Travis Scott festivalA nine-year-old boy placed in an induced coma after a crowd surge at the Astroworld festival in Houston, Texas, has died, a family lawyer says.Ezra Blount had been on life support in hospital due to severe brain and organ trauma since the show on 5 November.He is the youngest of 10 concertgoers to have been killed after panic broke out during rapper Travis Scott's headline performance.Hundreds of others were hurt when the crowd began to press towards the stage.Attorneys representing more than 200 people claiming they were injured in the crush told reporters on Friday they were filing another 90 lawsuits against the promoters of the event.On Sunday, a lawyer for the family of Ezra Blount confirmed the boy's death. "Ezra's death is absolutely heartbreaking," civil rights attorney Ben Crump said in a statement. "This should not have been the outcome of taking their son to a concert." In an earlier interview with local news outlet ABC13, Ezra's father Treston Blount said he was "not ready to lose my boy". "We still got a bunch of living to do," he said, describing how his son was a huge Scott fan who was "stoked" ahead of the performance.Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner said he was "saddened to learn of Ezra's death".I am saddened to learn of Ezra’s death this evening. Our city tonight prays for his mom, dad, grandparents, other family members and classmates at this time. They will need all of our support in the months and years to come. May God give them strength. RIP Ezra. st #AstroWorld pic.twitter.com/Ankq7FMa3lThe crowd surge at the concert began at about 21:15 local time on Friday, 5 November. There were about 50,000 people at the festival at the city's NRG Park complex. As the crush began causing injuries to people, panic grew and the casualties quickly overwhelmed the on-site first aiders, officials said. Investigators are reviewing video from the scene to explore the causes of the surge and what had prevented people from being able to escape. They are also working to interview victims and witnesses.Those who lost their lives were aged between nine and 27. To play this video you need to enable JavaScript in your browser.Scott, one of the biggest names in rap music, launched Astroworld with concert promoters Live Nation in 2018. He has asked victims to reach out to him, saying he "desperately wishes to share his condolences and provide aid", according to a statement. Police said the victims were crushed in a surge of fans near the stage at around 21:30 local time.Scott continued to perform for almost 40 minutes longer, eventually ending the set about 15 to 20 minutes ahead of the advertised time.Last week, Houston fire chief Samuel Peña said that Scott should have halted the show more quickly."At one point there was an ambulance that was trying to make its way through the crowd. The artist has command of that crowd," Mr Peña told NBC's Today show.Astroworld: Who were the victims?Dozens more lawsuits filed over Astroworld crushStudent in festival crush declared brain deadUS festival survivors recall crush panicUK hospital car blast declared a terror incidentBoris Johnson will chair an emergency Cobra meeting later after the explosion outside a Liverpool hospital.Motivation for hospital blast not clear - policeEU to widen Belarus sanctions as border row growsA US culture war raging in BrazilA Nobel prize-winning economist's guide to cookingWhat Biden and Xi want from virtual summitThe robots behind the bar serving your next drinkThe Uyghur woman fighting to keep her culture alive. VideoThe Uyghur woman fighting to keep her culture aliveHow might decisions made at COP26 change our lives?'My name is Ben and I get depressed sometimes' Video'My name is Ben and I get depressed sometimes'What the West gets wrong about the meaning of life'This dress is pure sisterhood' Video'This dress is pure sisterhood'Have you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.