Children in hospital as Dulwich school's ceiling collapsesA number of children have been taken to hospital after part of a ceiling collapsed at a primary school in south-east London.Pupils were evacuated from Rosemead Prep School in Dulwich after a second-floor ceiling caved in. London Fire Brigade (LFB) said three fire engines and 20 firefighters were called to the scene at about 09:20 GMT. A few people were treated for minor injuries and a number of children taken to hospital by London Ambulance crews.All children and staff were safely evacuated from the building, on Thurlow Park Road, LFB said. The incident was over by 11:50, a spokesperson said. London Ambulance Service (LAS) said it sent a number of resources to the scene, including ambulance crews, medics in cars and advanced paramedics."Our crews treated a number of patients at the scene and have now been stood down," a spokesperson added.The Met Police said officers also went to the school."All children and staff have been accounted for and the school is currently in the process of contacting parents. We await an update on assessment of any injuries," a spokesman said.There are extensive road closures in place as emergency services respond.A specialist USAR (Urban Search and Rescue) team and equipment were also used to ensure the building was "at no further risk of collapse", LFB confirmed.Very concerned to hear of the collapse of a ceiling at Rosemead School this morning. My thoughts are with the children, staff and parents. I hope no-one is seriously injured. I’ve contacted the school to offer my support. My thanks to the emergency services who attended the scene https://t.co/tZFEKiTZIfRapid Raducanu rise shows crucial value of UK Pro League as hotshot Kartal follows in her footstepsMan with knife assaults person at tube stationThere With You This Winter: Debt doctor Rippon Ray says people must get savvy about the rising fuel costsPeople of Hackney pay their respects on Remembrance SundayChristmas tree initiative raising funds for Toy AppealStella Frew: Driver jailed for running over woman in SuttonInformation about BBC links to other news sitesUK hospital car blast declared a terror incidentBoris Johnson will chair an emergency Cobra meeting after the explosion outside a Liverpool hospital.Motivation for hospital blast not clear - policeEU to widen Belarus sanctions as border row growsA US culture war raging in BrazilA Nobel prize-winning economist's guide to cookingWhat Biden and Xi want from virtual summitThe robots behind the bar serving your next drinkThe Uyghur woman fighting to keep her culture alive. VideoThe Uyghur woman fighting to keep her culture aliveHow might decisions made at COP26 change our lives?'My name is Ben and I get depressed sometimes' Video'My name is Ben and I get depressed sometimes'What the West gets wrong about the meaning of life'This dress is pure sisterhood' Video'This dress is pure sisterhood'Have you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.