Covid-19 in the UK: How many coronavirus cases are there in my area?By The Visual and Data Journalism TeamBBC NewsThere have been 9.5 million confirmed cases of coronavirus in the UK and nearly 143,000 people have died, government figures show.  However, these figures include only people who have died within 28 days of testing positive for coronavirus.So far, about 88% of people aged 12 and over in the UK have had their first vaccine dose, while 80% have had their second and 22% have had a booster dose.Find out how the pandemic has affected your area and how it compares with the national average: 
                        A modern browser with JavaScript and a stable internet connection are required to view this interactive.
                    How many cases, vaccinations and deaths in my area?Enter a full UK postcode or council name to find outIf you can't see the look-up click here.There has been a small fall in the average number of daily confirmed cases in recent weeks.A further 36,517 confirmed cases were announced on Sunday.NHS leaders have called for the reintroduction of some Covid restrictions, such as mandatory face coverings in crowded and enclosed spaces, to avoid a winter crisis.However, the government has said there are currently no plans to activate the so-called Plan B for winter.It is thought the infection rate in the first peak of the virus in spring last year was much higher than was evident from the reported number of cases. Testing capacity was then too limited to detect the true number of daily cases.The red areas on the map below show the places currently seeing the highest number of cases per 100,000 people.  You can use our postcode look-up to check what the rules are where you live.Sorry, your browser cannot display this mapTap or click to see how many cases per 100,000 in the latest weekMore than 50 million people, or about 88% of those aged 12 and over in the UK, have now received a first dose of a vaccine.The number of people who have received a second vaccine dose is now more than 46 million, or 80% of people aged 12 and over.A booster campaign is also now under way, with 30 million people in nine priority groups qualifying for a third dose. While the uptake of first and second doses has dropped off there has been a steep rise in people having booster doses. More than 10 million of these doses have been administered in England so far. In Scotland, 1.1 million people have had their booster shot, while that figure is over 620,000 in Wales and it is more than 200,000 in Northern Ireland.However, some doctors and others involved in the booster programme have told the BBC they are concerned about the speed of the rollout.Daily deaths have risen recentlyThere were 63 deaths within 28 days of a positive test reported on Sunday. Of those deaths, 51 were in England, six were in Wales, five in Northern Ireland and one in Scotland.England has seen the majority of UK deaths since the pandemic began, with more than 124,000 so far.   Prof Jonathan Van-Tam, England's deputy chief medical officer, has warned that "very high" coronavirus rates in the UK recently mean hard months are still to come.He told the BBC it was concerning that Covid levels were "running this hot, this early in the autumn season" and urged people to get their Covid jabs, boosters and flu vaccines.The most recent government figures show 8,652 people with coronavirus in hospital in the UK, down from 9,253 a week earlier. Although numbers of hospital patients with coronavirus are higher than they were over the summer, they are far below the peak of nearly 40,000 people back in January.Looking at Covid patients in hospital by region, the numbers are higher than in the summer and have been rising again recently in some regions. Death toll could be over 165,000When looking at the overall death toll from coronavirus, official figures count deaths in three different ways, each giving a slightly different number. First, government figures - the ones reported each day - count people who died within 28 days of testing positive for coronavirus. This figure is now more than 140,000.According to the latest ONS figures, the UK has now seen more than 165,000 deaths - that's all those deaths where coronavirus was mentioned on the death certificate even if the person had not been tested for the virus. The third measure counts all deaths over and above the usual number at the time of year - that figure was about 137,000 as of 29 October.In total, there were 12,631 deaths registered in the week to 29 October, which was 14% above the five-year average.Of the total deaths, 1,042 were related to coronavirus, 67 more than the previous week. There have been more deaths involving Covid than "excess" deaths since the start of the pandemic, meaning non-Covid deaths must be below usual levels. This could be down to the milder flu season last winter - due to less travel and more social distancing - and because some people who might have died for other reasons had there been no pandemic, died of Covid.The "R number" is the average number of people an infected person will pass the disease on to. If R is below one, then the number of people contracting the disease will fall; if it is above one, the number will grow. The government has said in the past that the R number is one of the most important factors in making policy decisions. The latest R number estimate for England is 0.8 to 1.0, for Scotland it is 0.9 to 1.1, for Wales it is 0.8 to 1.1 and for Northern Ireland it is 0.95 to 1.1.Covid map: Where are cases the highest?How do I get my free Covid tests?Where do people still need to socially distance?© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.