Maori tribe tells anti-vaccine protestors to stop using popular hakaA Maori tribe has told anti-vaccine protesters in New Zealand to stop the use of a famous haka "immediately". The Ka Mate haka is hugely popular as it is performed by national rugby team the All Blacks before every match. The Ngati Toa tribe, which has legal guardianship of the haka, issued a strong notice after protestors performed the war dance during demonstrations last week.The notice comes as vaccination rates among the Maori people have been low. Just 61% of eligible Maori people are fully vaccinated and 77% have received their first dose. This is short of New Zealand's targeted rate of 90% among its eligible population. "Ngati Toa condemns the use of the Ka Mate haka to push and promote anti-Covid-19 vaccination messages," said its chief executive officer Helmut Modlik in a statement. "Many of our tupuna [ancestors] lost their lives in previous pandemics... we are absolutely clear that the COVID-19 vaccine is the best protection we have available to us, and we are committed to supporting our whānau [family] to get vaccinated as soon as possible."Last week, an estimated 2,000 protestors gathered outside parliament in Wellington and across the country, waving large Trump flags and carrying anti-vaccination signs. Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern had earlier said the country will require teachers and workers in the health and disability sectors to be fully vaccinated against Covid. New Zealand, which initially adopted a tough Covid-19 response, has said it will begin moving away from a zero-Covid strategy toward one of living with the virus. The country has reported 9,000 cases so far and 34 deaths, with its death toll among the lowest in the world. You might also be interested in: To play this video you need to enable JavaScript in your browser.NZ Covid strategy in doubt amid Delta spreadNZ borders to remain closed for rest of the yearUK hospital car blast declared a terror incidentBoris Johnson will chair an emergency Cobra meeting later after the explosion outside a Liverpool hospital.Motivation for hospital blast not clear - policeEU to widen Belarus sanctions as border row growsA US culture war raging in BrazilA Nobel prize-winning economist's guide to cookingWhat Biden and Xi want from virtual summitThe robots behind the bar serving your next drinkThe Uyghur woman fighting to keep her culture alive. VideoThe Uyghur woman fighting to keep her culture aliveHow might decisions made at COP26 change our lives?'My name is Ben and I get depressed sometimes' Video'My name is Ben and I get depressed sometimes'What the West gets wrong about the meaning of life'This dress is pure sisterhood' Video'This dress is pure sisterhood'Have you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.