What are the UK travel rules, what tests do I need and can I visit the US?Restrictions on entering the US have been loosened.Fully vaccinated travellers - from more than 30 countries including the UK - can visit for the first time since the start of the pandemic.Vaccinated people who have had a negative test taken no more than three days before travelling can enter without quarantining.Another test three to five days after arriving in the US is recommended.Vaccine certificates including the NHS Covid Pass are accepted.Children under 18 do not need to be vaccinated, but should also take a test after arriving.Masks are mandatory on planes and in airports and travellers must follow state and local rules at their destination.The last of the nations on the UK's red list have been removed. Under red-list rules, travellers were only allowed to enter the country if they were a UK or Irish national, or a UK resident. They had to quarantine for 10 days, at their own expense, in a government-approved hotel.Transport Secretary Grant Shapps said countries could be added to the red list again if needed.In a separate change, travellers to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland can now take a lateral flow test two days after arriving - instead of a more expensive PCR test. This follows a similar move by England last month.What are the new rules for travelling to the UK?Fully vaccinated passengers travelling to the UK no longer have to take a Covid test before setting off.This applies to people vaccinated in the UK, the EU, the US and dozens of other recognised countries - including Brazil, Hong Kong, India, Pakistan, South Africa and Turkey.You must be able to prove you are fully vaccinated before travelling.The changes also apply to under-18s resident in one of these countries, whether or not they are vaccinated.Fully vaccinated people coming to the UK need to take a lateral flow test two days after arrival. Passengers need to book tests before travelling to the UK. They must send a picture to verify the result. The lateral flow tests for travel must be bought from private providers - NHS kits cannot be used. Passenger locator forms remain compulsory.If you aren't fully vaccinated - and you're over 18 - you must self-isolate at home for 10 days after arrival in the UK.Test to Release will remain an option for unvaccinated passengers to England who want to shorten their quarantine.What else do I need to do before I travel? You need to keep checking the rules for your destination country as these can change at short notice. The UK Foreign Office provides country-by-country travel advice.UK hospital car blast declared a terror incidentBoris Johnson will chair an emergency Cobra meeting after the explosion outside a Liverpool hospital.Motivation for hospital blast not clear - policeEU to widen Belarus sanctions as border row growsA US culture war raging in BrazilA Nobel prize-winning economist's guide to cookingWhat Biden and Xi want from virtual summitThe robots behind the bar serving your next drinkThe Uyghur woman fighting to keep her culture alive. VideoThe Uyghur woman fighting to keep her culture aliveHow might decisions made at COP26 change our lives?'My name is Ben and I get depressed sometimes' Video'My name is Ben and I get depressed sometimes'What the West gets wrong about the meaning of life'This dress is pure sisterhood' Video'This dress is pure sisterhood'Have you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.