Gas crisis: Energy regulator warns more customers face hit
Ofgem boss says "well above" hundreds of thousands of customers will have to move supplier as firms fold.
 
Gas price crisis: Food firms face huge price rise for carbon dioxide
The US supplier of CO2, which will receive millions in UK taxpayer support to reopen, will hike prices.
 
US lifting ban on imports of British lamb, says Boris Johnson
The PM says farmers can export to the US, and insists the chances of a wider trade deal are not fading.
 
Fraudsters steal £4m a day as crime surges
Total losses through fraud rockets by 30% in the first half of the year, with many victims not refunded.
 
Catalogue of errors led to £1bn of state pension underpayments
The National Audit Office says 134,000 pensioners, mostly women, were affected by a preventable scandal.
 
Pret to hire 3,000 new staff as city workers return
The coffee and sandwich chain plans to hire 3,000 staff after cutting same number in 2020.
 
Pandemic has changed travel forever, says AirBnB boss
Boss Brian Chesky says people are increasingly combining business and leisure travel thanks to remote working.
 
Evergrande: Crisis-hit firm strikes China debt deal
The company is also due to make a $83.5m interest payment on an offshore bond on Thursday.
 
'No clear end to HS2 cost and delays' say MPs
The Public Accounts Committee is "increasingly alarmed" about key parts of the rail project.
 
Joe Biden plays down chances of UK-US trade deal
The US president's comments come as he meets Boris Johnson for talks in the White House.
 
Failing energy firms may mean higher bills, warns regulator
Energy supplier Green is the latest firm to announce it is struggling to cope with the gas price crisis.
 
China pledges to stop building new coal energy plants abroad
The announcement is the country's latest climate pledge and a major step forward to address emissions.
 
Major record labels could face competition inquiry
The competition watchdog has been asked whether major record labels are distorting the market.
 
Mask-wearing on public transport sees big drop
Only 20% still wear masks at train stations now it is no longer compulsory, according to Network Rail.
 
Covid travel test change date needed to avoid losses
Airlines and airports say they need a date for when PCR tests are removed so they don't lose out on bookings.
 
Record backlog of cargo ships at California ports
Some 65 container ships are stuck outside the ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach, amid trade bottlenecks.
 
Staff to gain right to request flexible working from first day
All employees will be given the right to request flexible working, under government proposals.
 
German elections: Businesses face future without Merkel
Many companies in Germany are focused on short-term survival in the hope of medium-term revival.
 
How 'nerd' culture powered through the pandemic
Meet the online content creators beating the odds to build successful careers from their passions.
 
Can apps manage our chronic health conditions?
A Swedish tech firm has created an app to help alleviate people's joint pain.
 
'Looking back, it was an amazing thing I did'
Meet the founder on a 10-year mission to disrupt Japan's rigid work culture.
 
Gen Z battles to bring back unions, one Starbucks at a time
Younger Americans are reviving US labour activism amid stagnant wages and Covid hardship.
 
Why taking up an instrument has struck a chord for so many
The pandemic led to around 1m UK adults learning an instrument and many taking music lessons.
 
CEO Secrets: 'You can run a business and have a baby'
Planning for a maternity leave when you're the boss of a fast-growing company.
 
Why even giant ships can't solve the shipping crisis
A shortage of vessels is hampering global trade and may lead to empty shelves before Christmas.
 
Amazon's Cape Town base: The battle to save South African culture
Some indigenous groups say the planned office in Cape Town is on culturally important land.
 
The pressures - and rewards - of being an influencer
Running your own popular YouTube channel can be lucrative, but it comes with downsides.
 
The epicentre of Britain's pandemic house price boom
House prices have surged in many parts of the UK - and in one district they have risen by 29% in a year.
 
Could a reboot make social media a nicer place?
A Harvard University project will explore whether social media can be de-toxed
 
Women's state pension: 'It is like you've lived one big lie'
How women born in the 1950s had their retirement plans upended by state pension age changes.
 
How a monkey launched the pop-it toy craze
Why it took a TikTok primate to turn a forty-year-old idea into a global hit
 
The models that turned Instagram into their DIY catwalk
New York Fashion Week marks a tentative return - but how did supermodels keep working through Covid?
 
CEO Secrets: The bra boss busting stereotypes
Leanne Cahill, CEO of Bravissimo, shares her journey from shop floor to boardroom in retail.
 
Why coders love the AI that could put them out of a job
Artificial intelligence is getting better at penning code but still a long way from working alone.
 
Has Covid killed off business cards for good?
Sales of business cards have fallen sharply as a result of the pandemic.
 
