Covid rules: What's in England's 'Winter Plan'?Measures to deal with rising Covid cases in England over the winter have been announced - with a contingency "Plan B" if things get worse.Single vaccines will be offered to children aged 12-15 and booster jabs to over-50s, health workers and the most vulnerable. Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have confirmed they will offer the same. It's called the Covid-19 Response: Autumn and Winter Plan. Covid booster jabs will be offered to around 30 million people, including the over-50s, younger adults with health conditions and frontline health and social care workers.Health Secretary Sajid Javid said Plan A would also include offering vaccines to youngsters aged 12-15 and continuing to encourage unvaccinated people to get jabbed.If Plan A is not sufficient to prevent "unsustainable pressure" on the NHS, the government says Plan B will be required "as a last resort" - including: Plan B could be brought in at short notice as a response to "concerning" data. Government scientific advisers haven't said exactly what this data would be, but say it's important to keep an eye on: Prime Minister Boris Johnson said parts of Plan B could be introduced gradually, rather than all at once. What are the current rules in England?Businesses such as nightclubs are encouraged to use the NHS Covid Pass to check people are fully vaccinated. People who have been working from home are being encouraged to return to the workplace gradually.What is the situation in Scotland?From 1 October, all over-18s will be required to prove their vaccine status at nightclubs and other venues. What are the restrictions in Northern Ireland?Covid rules ease on dining, dancing and live showsWhat restrictions are still in place in Wales?Wales' First Minister Mark Drakeford has said he could be persuaded of the need for vaccine passports. His government is due to decide this week.UK recognises Covishield but confusion over travellersPeople vaccinated in India may still have to isolate for 10 days on arrival when UK rules change next monthUK PM to Macron: Donnez-moi un break over new pactTrump sues niece and NY Times over tax storyCould 241m vaccine doses go to waste?Life at 50C: Heat hitting home in Australia. VideoLife at 50C: Heat hitting home in AustraliaBiden meets Boris: Shared interests but bumps remainHas climate pledge to poor countries been met?German firms face uncertain future without MerkelAustralia's big gamble on the US over ChinaIndia Covid workers' families fight for compensationThe 'honour' of getting on the Fifa 22 soundtrackThe brothers who fled Nazi occupation in a kayakHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?Lithuania urges people to throw away Chinese phones1Angry scenes at Haiti airport as migrants arrive2Trump sues niece and NY Times over tax story3Netflix buys golden ticket to Roald Dahl's estate4Biden plays down chances of UK-US trade deal5Missing blogger Gabby Petito confirmed dead6German shooting linked to Covid conspiracies7Covid therapy from llamas shows promise8Sex and the City actors remember co-star Garson9Taliban ask to speak at UN General Assembly10© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.