Covid passports: How do I get one and when will I need it?New Covid rules are coming into force in Scotland and Wales in October restricting who can enter a nightclub or attend large-scale events.People in Scotland will need a "Covid passport", while Wales has announced that people will need to show an NHS Covid Pass.Plans to introduce Covid passports in England will not go ahead, but will be kept in reserve in case they are needed this winter. What are the Covid passport plans for Scotland?From 1 October, people in Scotland will need a Covid vaccination certificate to enter nightclubs, adult entertainment venues and large-scale events.The Scottish government has now defined a nightclub as being anywhere that fulfils all four of the following:  At the moment you can only get the passport if you have been fully vaccinated. In Scotland, proof of a recent negative test will not be enough.Some people will be exempt, including under-18s, people taking part in vaccine trials and those unable to be vaccinated for medical reasons.People will be able to show they've been fully vaccinated by using the NHS Scotland Covid Status App - available from 30 September - and getting a QR code. A paper version is also available.What are the new rules for Wales?From 11 October, people in Wales will be able to use the NHS Covid Pass to show they have been vaccinated.It will also be available to people who have had a negative lateral flow test in the past 48 hours. What happened to Covid passport plans in England?The government decided not to go ahead with vaccine passports in England, despite saying they would be introduced at the end of September.Setting out the government's winter Covid plans, Health Secretary Sajid Javid said they might be considered again later, if there was a Covid winter surge.The plans had faced opposition from some Tory backbenchers and the Liberal Democrats. Nightclubs described the plan as "chaotic and surreal". What's happening in  Northern Ireland?Northern Ireland has not yet announced whether it will introduced a similar scheme.How do I prove I've been vaccinated? As long as you're registered with a GP, you can get proof of your Covid-19 status via the NHS App (not the NHS Covid-19 app which alerts you if you've been close to someone with the virus).The app generates the NHS Covid Pass which shows your Covid vaccination details or test results.Over-18s can get an NHS Covid Pass to use in the UK if: Over-16s can get an NHS Covid Pass for foreign travel if:If you don't have a GP, or a mobile device, you can access the pass via the NHS website or by calling 119 to request a letter. The letter only shows your vaccination status (not test results) and has no expiry date.The NHS Covid Pass is available digitally but you need to register for an NHS login. Call 0300 303 5667 for a paper copy at least five days after your final dose.Currently, anyone 16 or over can go online and download a PDF version of their vaccination status showing a unique QR code. From 30 September, the NHS Scotland Covid Status App will be available, at which point the PDF function will be switched off.Printed letter versions for over-12s can be requested via the NHS inform website or by calling 0808 196 8565. You can apply for a Covid status certificate online and use it for travel. UK recognises Covishield but confusion over travellersPeople vaccinated in India may still have to isolate for 10 days on arrival when UK rules change next monthUK PM to Macron: Donnez-moi un break over new pactTrump sues niece and NY Times over tax storyCould 241m vaccine doses go to waste?Life at 50C: Heat hitting home in Australia. VideoLife at 50C: Heat hitting home in AustraliaBiden meets Boris: Shared interests but bumps remainHas climate pledge to poor countries been met?German firms face uncertain future without MerkelAustralia's big gamble on the US over ChinaIndia Covid workers' families fight for compensationThe 'honour' of getting on the Fifa 22 soundtrackThe brothers who fled Nazi occupation in a kayakHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?Lithuania urges people to throw away Chinese phones1Angry scenes at Haiti airport as migrants arrive2Trump sues niece and NY Times over tax story3Netflix buys golden ticket to Roald Dahl's estate4Biden plays down chances of UK-US trade deal5Missing blogger Gabby Petito confirmed dead6German shooting linked to Covid conspiracies7Covid therapy from llamas shows promise8Sex and the City actors remember co-star Garson9Taliban ask to speak at UN General Assembly10© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.