Travel update: What are the new rules for holidays in Europe and the US?Eight countries have now moved from the UK's red travel lists, to the less restrictive amber category. Meanwhile, the US will let fully vaccinated travellers from the UK - and many other countries - visit from November.Which countries have moved from the red to amber lists?Bangladesh, Egypt, Kenya, the Maldives, Oman, Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Turkey are now amber-list countries. They had been red.This means non-UK citizens or residents can now enter the UK from those nations, and no one has to pay for hotel quarantine.But aren't the red, amber and green lists being scrapped?The red lists will remain - but the amber and green lists for travel to England, Scotland and Northern Ireland will merge into a single "rest of world" category from 04:00 BST on Monday 4 October.Wales hasn't yet said whether it will do the same.What will the rules be on the "rest of world" list?You will still need to check entry requirements for your destination before you travel. Fully vaccinated travellers returning to England will no longer have to take a PCR test before coming home from these countries.They will still have to take a PCR test two days after arrival. But from later in October, they'll be able to do a cheaper and simpler lateral flow test instead - hopefully "for when people return from half-term breaks", says the UK government.People who are not fully vaccinated will still need a pre-departure test and a PCR test on days two and eight after they return. They must also self-isolate for 10 days.Most private providers charge above £60 for PCR tests and £30 for lateral flows. Test to Release will remain an option for unvaccinated passengers who want to shorten quarantine.What about Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland?While Scotland and Northern Ireland have agreed to adopt the rest of world list, they haven't confirmed whether the current testing rules will change.Wales also hasn't yet announced testing changes.From November, fully vaccinated UK passengers can travel to the US. This should include people who've had the AstraZeneca jab, even though the US regulator doesn't currently recommend the vaccine. Dr Anthony Fauci, President Biden's chief medical adviser, said he didn't think it would be a "problem", although the final decision rests with the Center for Disease Control and Prevention.Visitors will need to take part in testing and contact tracing.At present, only US citizens, residents and foreigners with special visas can enter from most European countries.What are the current amber-list rules?Most countries are on the amber list.Under-18s and adults who were fully vaccinated in the UK, the US and most European countries don't have to self-isolate upon arrival in the UK. Unvaccinated adults must self-isolate for 10 days.In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, under-11s don't have to test before travel, but do need to take one two days after arrival. Under-5s don't need to test.In Scotland, children over 12 must test before returning home, and again on day two. Nobody has to self-isolate upon return, unless they test positive/develop symptoms.Red-list countries are those the UK government says should not be visited "except in the most extreme of circumstances".If you have been in one in the last 10 days, you can only enter the UK if you are a UK or Irish national, or UK resident. Whatever your vaccination status:Plan A or Plan B - what could happen this winter?Covid map: Where are cases the highest?UK holidays: What are the rules?UK recognises Covishield but confusion over travellersPeople vaccinated in India may still have to isolate for 10 days on arrival when UK rules change next monthUK PM to Macron: Donnez-moi un break over new pactTrump sues niece and NY Times over tax storyCould 241m vaccine doses go to waste?Life at 50C: Heat hitting home in Australia. VideoLife at 50C: Heat hitting home in AustraliaBiden meets Boris: Shared interests but bumps remainHas climate pledge to poor countries been met?German firms face uncertain future without MerkelAustralia's big gamble on the US over ChinaIndia Covid workers' families fight for compensationThe 'honour' of getting on the Fifa 22 soundtrackThe brothers who fled Nazi occupation in a kayakHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?Lithuania urges people to throw away Chinese phones1Angry scenes at Haiti airport as migrants arrive2Trump sues niece and NY Times over tax story3Netflix buys golden ticket to Roald Dahl's estate4Biden plays down chances of UK-US trade deal5Missing blogger Gabby Petito confirmed dead6German shooting linked to Covid conspiracies7Covid therapy from llamas shows promise8Sex and the City actors remember co-star Garson9Taliban ask to speak at UN General Assembly10© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.