Staff to gain right to request flexible working from first dayThe government is proposing to give all employees the right to request flexible working when they start new jobs, the BBC understands. A consultation is to be launched on the proposals this week. The plan would allow all UK employees to request a flexible working arrangement from their first day at a new employer.At the moment, workers have to wait until they have been in their role for six months. The proposals would also see bosses have to respond to requests for flexible working more quickly than the current maximum of three months. It would also force firms to explain why any requests were refused.It is understood that the consultation document will be published on Thursday by the Department for Business.It started examining a range of flexible working options in 2019, including working different or condensed hours, job sharing and remote working.Jane Hutton, chief executive of the job search website Evenbreak, a social enterprise run by disabled people, said she welcomed the news. "For employers, offering flexible working means they can access so much more talent and that really benefits the business as well."Before the pandemic there was a huge resistance for people working from home but the reality is they are just as productive if not more so - it's just a pity it took a global pandemic for employers to trust their employees."Executive coach and disability equality trainer Mary Doyle said the right to request flexibility would help more employees. Previously she worked for 28 years in technology and working from home was not an option. Before the pandemic, she said that when it became more acceptable to work from home at a corporate level it still wasn't the preferred option."For it to be right rather than a privilege would have made a huge difference to me earlier in my career," she said.'Listening to employees is key'Stephen Warnham, head of content at UK jobs site Totaljobs.com, said the move pointed to "a growth in a hybrid way of working", where people are "trusted to work in the way that best gets the job done". "If you consider the jobs market as it stands with all its vacancies, businesses listening to the needs and wants of employees is key." As part of a survey of 200,000 staff worldwide, published in March this year, Totaljobs found that nine in 10 employees wanted partial flexibility to choose where they work. "From a legislative perspective this is long overdue as a third of employers we speak to are already doing this anyway, so it is a really critical change," said Mr Warnham.TUC general secretary Frances O'Grady said that flexible working "should be a right" to everyone from their first day in the job."But these proposals won't be the game changer ministers claim, as employers can still turn down any or all requests for flexible working," she continued. "The government should change the law so that workers have the legal right to flexible work from day one in the job - not just the right to ask for it."And Angela Rayner MP, Labour's Deputy Leader and Shadow Secretary of State for the Future of Work, said: "Labour will give workers the right to flexible working - not just the right to request it - and give all workers full rights from day one on the job." Gill McAteer, head of employment law at Citation, said that if an employee contract said the place of work was the office, employees have no legal right to work remotely."Until this becomes a reality, employees will have to accept their employer's back to work plan or face challenging it through the existing flexible working process," she said. However, Ms McAteer said that while it was "relatively easy" for employers to refuse a work from home request before the pandemic, now it is "more challenging" as employees can demonstrate they have "effectively" carried out their role from home during the crisis.The potential repercussions of employers getting this wrong can be costly, Ms McAteer explained, referring to a recent tribunal decision to award £185,000 in damages to an estate agent who was denied a flexible working request to leave work earlier to collect her daughter from nursery. What do you think of the government's proposals to allow new employees the right to request to work from home on their first day? Email: haveyoursay@bbc.co.uk. Please include a contact number if you are willing to speak to a BBC journalist. You can also get in touch in the following ways:If you are reading this page and can't see the form you will need to visit the mobile version of the BBC website to submit your question or comment or you can email us at HaveYourSay@bbc.co.uk. Please include your name, age and location with any submission. Most workers do not expect full office returnWorking from home job adverts riseUK recognises Covishield but confusion over travellersPeople vaccinated in India may still have to isolate for 10 days on arrival when UK rules change next monthUK PM to Macron: Donnez-moi un break over new pactTrump sues niece and NY Times over tax storyCould 241m vaccine doses go to waste?Life at 50C: Heat hitting home in Australia. VideoLife at 50C: Heat hitting home in AustraliaBiden meets Boris: Shared interests but bumps remainHas climate pledge to poor countries been met?German firms face uncertain future without MerkelAustralia's big gamble on the US over ChinaIndia Covid workers' families fight for compensationThe 'honour' of getting on the Fifa 22 soundtrackThe brothers who fled Nazi occupation in a kayakHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?Lithuania urges people to throw away Chinese phones1Angry scenes at Haiti airport as migrants arrive2Trump sues niece and NY Times over tax story3Netflix buys golden ticket to Roald Dahl's estate4Biden plays down chances of UK-US trade deal5Missing blogger Gabby Petito confirmed dead6German shooting linked to Covid conspiracies7Covid therapy from llamas shows promise8Sex and the City actors remember co-star Garson9Taliban ask to speak at UN General Assembly10© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.