US lifting ban on imports of British lamb, says Boris JohnsonThe United States is lifting its ban on imports of British lamb, Prime Minister Boris Johnson has announced.It would mean British farmers can export to the US for "the first time in decades", he added.The PM, who is in the US for talks with UN leaders and President Joe Biden, rejected claims the chances of a free trade deal were receding.But "in the meantime", he said the government was "taking practical steps to help our exports".The United States had banned British lamb and beef imports since 1989, since the first outbreaks of BSE, commonly known as mad cow disease. The ban on British beef was lifted in September last year. There is no indication yet of when the US will start accepting lamb and lamb products from the UK. The US Department for Agriculture has been consulting on lifting the ban since 2016. There were originally hopes it would be lifted the following year.At the time, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs estimated the change would be worth an extra £35m a year to the UK economy. On the chances of a wider trade deal, Mr Johnson admitted the UK was now focusing on making "incremental steps" rather than a full-blown deal. He added that although the Biden administration "is not doing free trade deals around the world right now," he had "every confidence that a great deal is there to be done."Securing a trade deal with the United States has been a priority for many Brexit-backing politicians, following the UK's departure from the EU. But on Tuesday, Mr Biden appeared to downplay the chances of an agreement soon, adding he would discuss the issue "a little bit" with Mr Johnson during his trip to the White House. "We're going to have to work that through," the US president added. George Eustice, the UK environment secretary, told Sky News a trade deal was "not a priority for the US administration" and the UK was "not putting timescales on it".How BSE crisis shook our faith in foodUK recognises Covishield but confusion over travellersPeople vaccinated in India may still have to isolate for 10 days on arrival when UK rules change next monthUK PM to Macron: Donnez-moi un break over new pactTrump sues niece and NY Times over tax storyCould 241m vaccine doses go to waste?Life at 50C: Heat hitting home in Australia. VideoLife at 50C: Heat hitting home in AustraliaBiden meets Boris: Shared interests but bumps remainHas climate pledge to poor countries been met?German firms face uncertain future without MerkelAustralia's big gamble on the US over ChinaIndia Covid workers' families fight for compensationThe 'honour' of getting on the Fifa 22 soundtrackThe brothers who fled Nazi occupation in a kayakHave you been getting these songs wrong?What happens to your body in extreme heat?Lithuania urges people to throw away Chinese phones1Angry scenes at Haiti airport as migrants arrive2Trump sues niece and NY Times over tax story3Netflix buys golden ticket to Roald Dahl's estate4Biden plays down chances of UK-US trade deal5Missing blogger Gabby Petito confirmed dead6German shooting linked to Covid conspiracies7Covid therapy from llamas shows promise8Sex and the City actors remember co-star Garson9Taliban ask to speak at UN General Assembly10© 2021 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.